# Requirements for Degrees | Graceland

Source URL: https://www.graceland.edu/academics/academic-catalogs/undergraduate-catalog/educational-programs/requirements-for-degrees/#top

Bachelor of Arts Degree, Bachelor of Science Degree, and Bachelor of Science in Nursing Degree*

*Students who choose to pursue the Bachelor of Arts Honors, Bachelor of Science Honors, or Bachelor of Science in Nursing Honors degree should plan to meet the specific requirements of theHonors Programin addition to all other graduation requirements.

Graceland University confers the degree of Bachelor of Arts, the degree of Bachelor of Science, and the degree of Bachelor of Science in Nursing. The type of degree granted is determined by the choice of major. These baccalaureate degrees are conferred on those students who satisfactorily complete the following requirements:

Transformational Leadership Major

Since 1895, Graceland University has been developing students into people who will change the world by giving them the best experience and education possible. To accomplish this transformative experience, Graceland requires all incoming students to participate in the Transformational Leadership Major.

Unique to Graceland, the Transformational Leadership Major provides students with both the classroom and experiential learning that provides them with the knowledge and skills to change the world. Accompanying the knowledge that the student’s chosen expertise major provides, this major gives students a breadth of knowledge via the general education component, systematic development of their leadership skills in the Life & Leadership sequence and a start on the path of developing strategic skills through study in Health and Wholeness, Data Fluency & Citizenship, and Social Responsibility.

Scaffolded throughout this curriculum are the foundational learning outcomes of higher order thinking, character, social responsibility, holistic well-being, and digital citizenship.

General Education Program

The General Education Program requires completion of the following.

Foundational Skills – courses in writing and communication skills (9 s.h.)

Foundational Skills – courses in mathematics/quantitative skills (6 s.h.)

Statistics Course (3 s.h.)

Mathematics Courses (3 s.h.)

Liberal Learning – courses in arts, histories, humanities, natural sciences, and social Sciences (16 s.h.)Arts (3 s.h.)

Histories (3 s.h.)

Humanities (3 s.h.)

Natural Sciences (4 s.h. which requires a laboratory experience)

Social Sciences (3 s.h.)

Theme-based art history course exploring topics such as innovation, power, politics, architecture, entertainment, sacred spaces, sustainability, and eco art throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

Theme-based art history course that explores topics such as activism, empathy, justice, disability, mental illness, feminism, sexuality, queer art, social and civic engagement, labor, and race throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

The study of structure and function of the human body on the cellular, tissue, organ, and organ-system level. All organ systems are discussed. Emphasis is on the anatomy of the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and digestive systems. Laboratory includes both gross and microscopic structure and function. Additional fee required. (One year each of high school biology and chemistry or the equivalent strongly recommended.) GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

An introduction to the principles of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, including a study of atoms, chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions (focusing on ones in the cell), solution chemistry, introduction of biological molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids). This course is intended for students desiring a general education in chemistry, those majoring in nursing or allied health fields and those that need it to fulfill the chemistry requirement for cell biology and genetics course. Prerequisite: MATH1280 or one year of high school algebra (C or better strongly recommended). Additional fees required. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

This course will expose students to the field of forensic science primarily using chemical forensics and testing. Topics include evidence collection and preservation, drugs and drug chemistry, heat and explosions, poisons and others. The course will cover basic chemical concepts needed to plan, execute, and interpret forensic results. All necessary scientific concepts will be developed in the context of forensic science.  Additional fee required.  ELO6 Science - World Citizenship, ELO6 Science - Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

General Chemistry I Workshop is appropriate for any student interested in developing a strong background in chemistry. It is intended to be the first university chemistry course for science majors. As such, it will be fairly rigorous and will draw upon previous experience in mathematics and science. Major areas to be covered include atomic and molecular structures, chemical bonding, stoichiometric relationships, and chemical reactions. Laboratory activities and experiments are closely related to concepts introduced in class discussions and will allow students to develop their laboratory skills. Good safety practices and experimental record keeping will be stressed. Students are expected to actively participate in class activities and discussions in addition to homework assignments, individual/group study and preparation for exams. Course is intended for biology, chemistry, and some allied health majors.  Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. Prerequisites: MATH1280 and CHEM1310 or one year of high school chemistry.  EL06 Science, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An examination of concepts that have application to communication across cultural boundaries, with emphasis on relating them to effective intercultural communication skGE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. ELO4 Global Learning - World Citizenship, ELO4 Global Learning - Equality and Peace, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

+This course is only offered every other year.

An examination of the various landmark theories, such as rhetorical, Marxist, and feminist to analyze popular culture, with an emphasis on the importance of communication in the production and consumption of culture. Students will study the development of culture by applying different theories or 'lenses' to cultural artifacts including music, movies, advertisements, clothing, etc. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

+This course is only offered every other year.

Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, national income, international trade and finance, fiscal policy, monetary policy, money, and banking. Prerequisite: 1 year high school algebra; geometry recommended. ELO5 Social Science - World Citizenship, ELO5 Social Science - Innovation

Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, production, market structures, and a survey of contemporary economic problems, e.g. sustainability. ELO5 Social Science - Sustainability

Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

This is a writing-intensive course that is meant to develop students’ academic research processes. Students should expect to engage in work that is framed for “public” audiences outside of the classroom and to practice collaboration in research and writing processes.  As the final course of the foundational communication skills sequence, students will be encouraged to use research processes to gain an awareness of topics and conversations happening in the larger social world.  In order for students to complete the foundational skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010 and COMM1100 or HONR2010. ELO1B Communication, GE1C Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Examines literary works by authors from a broad range of artistic and cultural traditions. Designed to offer students an introduction to literature as a point of access into global communities such as Western European, Middle Eastern, African, Asian, Indigenous, and Latinx. ELO5 Humanities - World Citizenship, ELO5 Humanities - Sustainability, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. +This course is only offered every other year.

Study of cinema as an artistic endeavor, form of rhetoric, cultural mirror, and purveyor of ideology. Introduces the fundamentals of the discipline, to include vocabulary, concepts of film production, film reception, film analysis, film interpretation, and film criticism. Exploration of the artistic, commercial, entertainment, and ideological relationships between cinema and American culture, along with practice in the film literacy skills needed to qualitatively assess and communicate cinema’s artistic and cultural contributions. ELO5 Humanities - Innovation, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

Special studies in Literature designed primarily for the non-English major. Content may vary and will be announced at time of offering. When content changes, course may be repeated for credit. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

Explores cultural systems of meaning and attendant issues of power, particularly in terms of class, gender, nation, race, nature, and sexuality. Emphasis on commercial and media culture. ELO5 Humanities - Equality, ELO5 Humanities - Equality and Peace.

+This course is only offered every other year.

A history of the people of African descent in the Americas, including the United States, as well as the Caribbean, Central and South America. Issues of survival and resistance, the persistence of racism and white supremacy, and struggles for freedom, across countries and time periods, will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - Equality, ELO5 Histories - Equality and Peace, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

An examination of the complex relationship between human society and nature from early settlements to the present in what is now the United States. Important topics include the impact of human settlement, population growth, use of land and natural resources, the effects of industrialization, and the development of the conservation and environmental movements. ELO5 Histories - Sustainability, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An overview of selected applications of mathematics for non-majors. Graph theory, cryptography, and voting theory. ELO6 Math

Solutions of polynomial, rational and radical equations, systems of equations, matrices, sequences, series, functions, exponentials.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

Data analysis and measures of central tendency, dispersion, and correlation. Introduction to probability. Estimation and hypothesis testing. Bivariate regression. ANOVA. Introduction to nonparametric techniques. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

An introduction to differential and integral calculus. Topics include limits, continuity, differentiation and integration techniques, and applications. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

Limits, continuity, differentiation, and applications including exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse functions. Mean value theorem, curve sketching, Riemann sums, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite: 2 years high school algebra. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A survey of topics in discrete mathematics focusing on introductory logic, methods of mathematical proof, set theory, determinants and matrices, combinatorics, and graph theory. Prerequisite: Instructor approval for non-CSIT/MATH majors, 2 years high school algebra or MATH1280. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

This course will focus on how music has historically been used for social justice, activism, and reform both within the United States and worldwide. Additionally, it will foster critical discussion and reflection on a wide range of artistic activism and applied research. What is musical activism? What kind of social responsibilities do music researchers have? Can music be used to bring about social justice? Music has long been used by movements seeking social change. People from around the world have used music as a platform to speak up and sing out about injustices. This course will focus discussion on the sounds and sentiments of social activism in the public sphere and the value and challenge of cultural advocacy in civil society. From protest songs of the Civil Rights Movement, to music concerts for charity causes, to freedom songs of the African Americans, to the Singing Revolution of the country of Estonia, to songs of the LGBTQ movement, to the Sigauque Project in Mozambique, to the protest songs of the American union movement… and so on. Through readings, discussion, and in-depth analysis of these different songs and movements, students would gain knowledge of efforts to bring about both cultural and social change throughout the world. ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

This course examines the historical significance of popular music in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present. This course will focus on learning how to describe and identify the musical characteristics that differentiate American popular music styles and how they have evolved to create new styles within the pop genre, by focusing on the historical, socio-cultural, political, and economic forces. No formal musical training is necessary to enroll in the course. GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

An introductory survey of psychological methods and thoughts as they relate to human experience and behavior. Topics include the role of the central nervous system in mediating behavior, learning and memory, states of awareness, motivation and emotion, personality, psychological disorders, and therapy. ELO5 Social Science – Innovation, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences.

The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

Designed to develop an understanding of how Theatre and society coexist in our world. Course fosters an appreciation for the theatre artist’s skills and expertise.  In this course students experience acting, design, and playwriting through collaborative group projects and interactive assignments.  Students will explore the complex relationship between Theatre and society from the past to the present through presentations and class discussions. ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

Introduction to the elements and practices of theatrical construction and scene design. Concentration on the techniques of theatrical construction, costume construction, lighting technology, stage mechanics, alternative methods of staging and shifting stage scenery, backstage organization, and development through practical experience of essential woodworking and stagecraft skills. Laboratory session required. Additional fee required. ELO4 Global Learning - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning - Arts.

Theme-based art history course exploring topics such as innovation, power, politics, architecture, entertainment, sacred spaces, sustainability, and eco art throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

Theme-based art history course that explores topics such as activism, empathy, justice, disability, mental illness, feminism, sexuality, queer art, social and civic engagement, labor, and race throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

The study of structure and function of the human body on the cellular, tissue, organ, and organ-system level. All organ systems are discussed. Emphasis is on the anatomy of the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and digestive systems. Laboratory includes both gross and microscopic structure and function. Additional fee required. (One year each of high school biology and chemistry or the equivalent strongly recommended.) GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

An introduction to the principles of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, including a study of atoms, chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions (focusing on ones in the cell), solution chemistry, introduction of biological molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids). This course is intended for students desiring a general education in chemistry, those majoring in nursing or allied health fields and those that need it to fulfill the chemistry requirement for cell biology and genetics course. Prerequisite: MATH1280 or one year of high school algebra (C or better strongly recommended). Additional fees required. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

This course will expose students to the field of forensic science primarily using chemical forensics and testing. Topics include evidence collection and preservation, drugs and drug chemistry, heat and explosions, poisons and others. The course will cover basic chemical concepts needed to plan, execute, and interpret forensic results. All necessary scientific concepts will be developed in the context of forensic science.  Additional fee required.  ELO6 Science - World Citizenship, ELO6 Science - Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

General Chemistry I Workshop is appropriate for any student interested in developing a strong background in chemistry. It is intended to be the first university chemistry course for science majors. As such, it will be fairly rigorous and will draw upon previous experience in mathematics and science. Major areas to be covered include atomic and molecular structures, chemical bonding, stoichiometric relationships, and chemical reactions. Laboratory activities and experiments are closely related to concepts introduced in class discussions and will allow students to develop their laboratory skills. Good safety practices and experimental record keeping will be stressed. Students are expected to actively participate in class activities and discussions in addition to homework assignments, individual/group study and preparation for exams. Course is intended for biology, chemistry, and some allied health majors.  Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. Prerequisites: MATH1280 and CHEM1310 or one year of high school chemistry.  EL06 Science, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An examination of concepts that have application to communication across cultural boundaries, with emphasis on relating them to effective intercultural communication skGE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. ELO4 Global Learning - World Citizenship, ELO4 Global Learning - Equality and Peace, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

+This course is only offered every other year.

An examination of the various landmark theories, such as rhetorical, Marxist, and feminist to analyze popular culture, with an emphasis on the importance of communication in the production and consumption of culture. Students will study the development of culture by applying different theories or 'lenses' to cultural artifacts including music, movies, advertisements, clothing, etc. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

+This course is only offered every other year.

Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, national income, international trade and finance, fiscal policy, monetary policy, money, and banking. Prerequisite: 1 year high school algebra; geometry recommended. ELO5 Social Science - World Citizenship, ELO5 Social Science - Innovation

Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, production, market structures, and a survey of contemporary economic problems, e.g. sustainability. ELO5 Social Science - Sustainability

Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

This is a writing-intensive course that is meant to develop students’ academic research processes. Students should expect to engage in work that is framed for “public” audiences outside of the classroom and to practice collaboration in research and writing processes.  As the final course of the foundational communication skills sequence, students will be encouraged to use research processes to gain an awareness of topics and conversations happening in the larger social world.  In order for students to complete the foundational skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010 and COMM1100 or HONR2010. ELO1B Communication, GE1C Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Examines literary works by authors from a broad range of artistic and cultural traditions. Designed to offer students an introduction to literature as a point of access into global communities such as Western European, Middle Eastern, African, Asian, Indigenous, and Latinx. ELO5 Humanities - World Citizenship, ELO5 Humanities - Sustainability, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. +This course is only offered every other year.

Study of cinema as an artistic endeavor, form of rhetoric, cultural mirror, and purveyor of ideology. Introduces the fundamentals of the discipline, to include vocabulary, concepts of film production, film reception, film analysis, film interpretation, and film criticism. Exploration of the artistic, commercial, entertainment, and ideological relationships between cinema and American culture, along with practice in the film literacy skills needed to qualitatively assess and communicate cinema’s artistic and cultural contributions. ELO5 Humanities - Innovation, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

Special studies in Literature designed primarily for the non-English major. Content may vary and will be announced at time of offering. When content changes, course may be repeated for credit. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

Explores cultural systems of meaning and attendant issues of power, particularly in terms of class, gender, nation, race, nature, and sexuality. Emphasis on commercial and media culture. ELO5 Humanities - Equality, ELO5 Humanities - Equality and Peace.

+This course is only offered every other year.

A history of the people of African descent in the Americas, including the United States, as well as the Caribbean, Central and South America. Issues of survival and resistance, the persistence of racism and white supremacy, and struggles for freedom, across countries and time periods, will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - Equality, ELO5 Histories - Equality and Peace, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

An examination of the complex relationship between human society and nature from early settlements to the present in what is now the United States. Important topics include the impact of human settlement, population growth, use of land and natural resources, the effects of industrialization, and the development of the conservation and environmental movements. ELO5 Histories - Sustainability, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An overview of selected applications of mathematics for non-majors. Graph theory, cryptography, and voting theory. ELO6 Math

Solutions of polynomial, rational and radical equations, systems of equations, matrices, sequences, series, functions, exponentials.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

Data analysis and measures of central tendency, dispersion, and correlation. Introduction to probability. Estimation and hypothesis testing. Bivariate regression. ANOVA. Introduction to nonparametric techniques. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

An introduction to differential and integral calculus. Topics include limits, continuity, differentiation and integration techniques, and applications. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

Limits, continuity, differentiation, and applications including exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse functions. Mean value theorem, curve sketching, Riemann sums, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite: 2 years high school algebra. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A survey of topics in discrete mathematics focusing on introductory logic, methods of mathematical proof, set theory, determinants and matrices, combinatorics, and graph theory. Prerequisite: Instructor approval for non-CSIT/MATH majors, 2 years high school algebra or MATH1280. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

This course will focus on how music has historically been used for social justice, activism, and reform both within the United States and worldwide. Additionally, it will foster critical discussion and reflection on a wide range of artistic activism and applied research. What is musical activism? What kind of social responsibilities do music researchers have? Can music be used to bring about social justice? Music has long been used by movements seeking social change. People from around the world have used music as a platform to speak up and sing out about injustices. This course will focus discussion on the sounds and sentiments of social activism in the public sphere and the value and challenge of cultural advocacy in civil society. From protest songs of the Civil Rights Movement, to music concerts for charity causes, to freedom songs of the African Americans, to the Singing Revolution of the country of Estonia, to songs of the LGBTQ movement, to the Sigauque Project in Mozambique, to the protest songs of the American union movement… and so on. Through readings, discussion, and in-depth analysis of these different songs and movements, students would gain knowledge of efforts to bring about both cultural and social change throughout the world. ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

This course examines the historical significance of popular music in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present. This course will focus on learning how to describe and identify the musical characteristics that differentiate American popular music styles and how they have evolved to create new styles within the pop genre, by focusing on the historical, socio-cultural, political, and economic forces. No formal musical training is necessary to enroll in the course. GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

An introductory survey of psychological methods and thoughts as they relate to human experience and behavior. Topics include the role of the central nervous system in mediating behavior, learning and memory, states of awareness, motivation and emotion, personality, psychological disorders, and therapy. ELO5 Social Science – Innovation, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences.

The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

Designed to develop an understanding of how Theatre and society coexist in our world. Course fosters an appreciation for the theatre artist’s skills and expertise.  In this course students experience acting, design, and playwriting through collaborative group projects and interactive assignments.  Students will explore the complex relationship between Theatre and society from the past to the present through presentations and class discussions. ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.

Introduction to the elements and practices of theatrical construction and scene design. Concentration on the techniques of theatrical construction, costume construction, lighting technology, stage mechanics, alternative methods of staging and shifting stage scenery, backstage organization, and development through practical experience of essential woodworking and stagecraft skills. Laboratory session required. Additional fee required. ELO4 Global Learning - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning - Arts.

Alternative General Education ProgramStudents entering Graceland with 48 or more s.h. of transfer credit or students entering online or completion programs automatically qualify for the Alternative General Education program. Students must complete a total of 33 s.h. including:

Life and Leadership

Designed to correlate students’ extracurricular activities with what they learn in the classrooms, the 12 credit hours spread over the 4 years provides a systematic application of leadership principles to real world experience, with each year bringing an increasingly broad focus to this component of the Transformational Leadership Major.

The Life and Leadership sequence of courses includes the following courses. (12 s.h.)

Exposes new students to the broad opportunities of the institution; and integrates new students into the life of the institution. Students will explore, apply, and reflect upon themes centering around communication, organization, collaboration, listening, and self-awareness. Students will understand the opportunity to engage in co-curricular circles, develop inside-and-outside-the-classroom identity, recognize leadership styles, and continue reflection of self-growth and leadership development.

Integrates personal life and leadership skills into the group setting while introducing additional complementary topics such as: stages of group development, extrinsic/intrinsic motivation, emotional intelligence, inclusivity, trust, group dynamics, conflict resolution, group roles, and integrity. Students will understand the roles of Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in group leadership.

Applies leadership skills beyond individuals and groups to the organizational level. Students will explore social intelligence, conflict management and resolution, bias assessment, information collection, and evidence assessment. Students will enroll in, complete, and reflect upon assigned SkillPath Leadership courses. Students will apply Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in organizational leadership.

The capstone course of the LEAD series at Graceland University is an integrated and applied experience mentored by acknowledged leaders at the university or by external educational, business, or health care mentors outside the university.   Students will apply and share with the university their holistic development as a student over their time at Graceland University including their development both inside and outside the classroom to build confidence in the leadership skills they have developed for their futures via a portfolio addressing these applied and reflective topics.

Exposes new students to the broad opportunities of the institution; and integrates new students into the life of the institution. Students will explore, apply, and reflect upon themes centering around communication, organization, collaboration, listening, and self-awareness. Students will understand the opportunity to engage in co-curricular circles, develop inside-and-outside-the-classroom identity, recognize leadership styles, and continue reflection of self-growth and leadership development.

Integrates personal life and leadership skills into the group setting while introducing additional complementary topics such as: stages of group development, extrinsic/intrinsic motivation, emotional intelligence, inclusivity, trust, group dynamics, conflict resolution, group roles, and integrity. Students will understand the roles of Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in group leadership.

Applies leadership skills beyond individuals and groups to the organizational level. Students will explore social intelligence, conflict management and resolution, bias assessment, information collection, and evidence assessment. Students will enroll in, complete, and reflect upon assigned SkillPath Leadership courses. Students will apply Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in organizational leadership.

The capstone course of the LEAD series at Graceland University is an integrated and applied experience mentored by acknowledged leaders at the university or by external educational, business, or health care mentors outside the university.   Students will apply and share with the university their holistic development as a student over their time at Graceland University including their development both inside and outside the classroom to build confidence in the leadership skills they have developed for their futures via a portfolio addressing these applied and reflective topics.

Strategic SkillsThese three courses set students on a path to developing strategic skills in the respective areas fundamental to the mission of Graceland University. Students are introduced to and explore a variety of concepts important to these subject areas and which give them skills to use throughout their lifetimes.

The Strategic Skills sequence includes the following courses. (9 s.h.)

An introduction to the concepts of responsible activity and practices in the digital world, important software tools, and understanding the use of data and data analytics in the digital economy.  The course teaches students relevant skills necessary to analyze data, prepare visualizations of data, and engage in the digital economy.

Introduces students to foundational concepts in health and wellness as well as practices that promote life-long wholeness, including physical and mental health risk assessment and mitigation.

Provides students an introductory foundation in social responsibility and ethics in the context of moral, social, and environmental issues. Students will be given the opportunity to understand how personal views, choices, privileges, and behaviors impact their communities and those of other individuals. Students will learn to engage in compassionate and constructive dialogue about diverse perspectives.

An introduction to the concepts of responsible activity and practices in the digital world, important software tools, and understanding the use of data and data analytics in the digital economy.  The course teaches students relevant skills necessary to analyze data, prepare visualizations of data, and engage in the digital economy.

Introduces students to foundational concepts in health and wellness as well as practices that promote life-long wholeness, including physical and mental health risk assessment and mitigation.

Provides students an introductory foundation in social responsibility and ethics in the context of moral, social, and environmental issues. Students will be given the opportunity to understand how personal views, choices, privileges, and behaviors impact their communities and those of other individuals. Students will learn to engage in compassionate and constructive dialogue about diverse perspectives.

1No more than 8 s.h. of Physical Education activity courses numbered 0000-1000 may be presented toward the 120 hours required for graduation. No more than 4 s.h. of the 8 s.h. applied toward graduation may be earned through varsity athletics.

Up to 12 s.h. of PHED1700/2700/3700/4700 allowed toward total hours for graduation.

Non-music majors may present no more than 8 s.h. of music ensemble credit toward graduation. Music majors may present 12 s.h. of music ensemble credit.

No more than 8 s.h. of Theatre Production Studies/ Advanced Theatre Production Studies may be counted toward credits required for graduation.

No more than two developmental courses, number DEVL0000-1990, may be applied toward graduation.

No more than 4 s.h. of Free Market Practicum (BUAD3350) may be counted toward any graduation requirement.

2A Graceland student engaged in a formal program of study abroad, whether sponsored by a foreign or domestic institution of higher learning, will be considered “in residence” for a maximum of one academic year if he/she has his/her proposed program of study approved in advance by the Registrar and by the chairperson of the division in which he/she plans to major, and if he/she claims intent to complete a degree at Graceland.

3First time Freshmen, Freshmen transfers, and Sophomore transfers with less than 48 hours are required to take the Transformational Leadership Major.  Students transferring in 48 semesters hours or more can choose to OPT IN or OPT OUT of the Transformational Leadership sequence. Student classification will be determined by their year of matriculation to Graceland University and the credit hours they have earned.

Starting with the 2024-25 academic year: Juniors or Seniors who choose to OPT IN to Transformational Leadership to earn the Minor are required to take LEAD3300, LEAD4300 plus the three strategic skills courses (Health and Wholeness, Digital Fluency and Citizenship, Social Responsibility) for a total of 15 semester hours. This will earn these students a Transformational Leadership Minor. Junior or Senior transfer students may take only part of the leadership sequence but will not earn the Minor.

4Students who have completed an Associate of Arts (AA) or Associate of Science (AS) degree from a regionally accredited institution of higher education will automatically receive an General Education waiver. A student holding a BA, BS, BSN, or a more advanced degree from an accredited institution other than Graceland desiring to qualify for another major and/or degree is considered to have met the intent of the general education program by completion of the earlier degree. Such a candidate would be required to meet the major course and residence requirements only.

5Students transferring will join the sequence during their first semester at Graceland. Life and Leadership should NOT hold a student back from their graduation plan.

6Students in the BSN face-to-face and degree completion programs will follow a different path.

NOTE: A student completing two majors at Graceland on two different graduation dates will receive a second degree only if:

Otherwise students will receive a single degree with a notation on the transcript that a second major has been earned. If a student is awarded a single degree with two or more majors, the student’s declaration of a first major will determine whether the degree awarded will be a BA, BS, or BSN.

NOTE: Only courses that count toward a major may count toward a minor in that subject area.

It is the responsibility of the student to apply for graduation preferably one year prior to the anticipated graduation date, but not later than 30 days prior to the graduation ceremony.

Two commencement ceremonies are available each academic year.

### Preparing for Graduation

At least twelve months prior to the fall or spring commencement convocations, students wishing to participate in the ceremony must complete and submit anApplication for Graduation. Submitting an application will activate a series of communications that will keep applicants informed about possible graduation discrepancies needing to be resolved, ordering caps and gowns, and the schedule of commencement activities. A graduation fee is assessed after receipt of the application.

1 University Pl,Lamoni, IA 50140641.784.5000866.472.2352Campus Map

1401 W. Truman Road,Independence, MO  64050816.833.0524800.833.0524

We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.

You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.

This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognizing you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.

Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.

If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.

This website uses Google Analytics to collect anonymous information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages.

Keeping this cookie enabled helps us to improve our website.

Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!


## Additional List Items

- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- 120 semester hours1
- 39 upper division semester hours (3000 and 4000 level courses)
- 2.00 grade point average on all work and 2.00 average in major(s)
- 30 of the last 60 semester hours taken immediately prior to graduation must be through Graceland University2
- A recognized major or equivalent
- Completion of the Transformational Leadership major3which includes:Completion of the required General Education program or, for eligible transfer students, the alternative general education program, or general education waiver3.Completion of the Life and Leadership course sequence4.Completion of the Strategic Skills course sequence5.
- Completion of the required General Education program or, for eligible transfer students, the alternative general education program, or general education waiver3.
- Completion of the Life and Leadership course sequence4.
- Completion of the Strategic Skills course sequence5.
- General Education ProgramGeneral Education ProgramThe General Education Program requires completion of the following.Foundational Skills – courses in writing and communication skills (9 s.h.)ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing Skills orHONR1010Honors 101COMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking orHONR2010Honors 201ENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and ArgumentationFoundational Skills – courses in mathematics/quantitative skills (6 s.h.)Statistics Course (3 s.h.)MATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1370Statistics for SciencesMathematics Courses (3 s.h.)MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal ArtsMATH1280College AlgebraMATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1500Applied CalculusMATH1510Calculus IMATH2350Discrete MathematicsLiberal Learning – courses in arts, histories, humanities, natural sciences, and social Sciences (16 s.h.)Arts (3 s.h.)ARTS2330Art History: Innovation and PoliticsARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy, and JusticeOne studio art or graphic design course with no prerequisiteMUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social JusticeMUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular Music3 credits ensemble participation from one specific area (vocal/instrumental) All three credits must be earned in one area.THTR1230Theatre and SocietyTHTR1310Introduction to StagecraftHistories (3 s.h.)HIST1200History of the African DiasporaHIST1560Environmental HistoryHIST2420United States History Since 1877Humanities (3 s.h.)COMM2110Intercultural CommunicationCOMM2500Introduction to Mass MediaENGL2510Introduction to FilmENGL2370World LiteraturesENGL2903Topics in LiteratureENGL3480Cultural StudiesNatural Sciences (4 s.h. which requires a laboratory experience)BIOL/CHEM1200Environmental ScienceBIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology ICHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and BiochemistryCHEM1340Forensic ChemistryCHEM1410General Chemistry I WorkshopSCIE1200Integrated ScienceSocial Sciences (3 s.h.)ECON1300Principles of MacroeconomicsECON1320Principles of MicroeconomicsEDUC2120Human RelationsPSYC1300Introductory PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental PsychologyCourses OfferedARTS2330Art History: Innovation and PoliticsARTS2330Art History: Innovation and Politics  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course exploring topics such as innovation, power, politics, architecture, entertainment, sacred spaces, sustainability, and eco art throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.ARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and JusticeARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and Justice  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course that explores topics such as activism, empathy, justice, disability, mental illness, feminism, sexuality, queer art, social and civic engagement, labor, and race throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.BIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)BIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesBIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)BIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)  - 4 s.h.The study of structure and function of the human body on the cellular, tissue, organ, and organ-system level. All organ systems are discussed. Emphasis is on the anatomy of the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and digestive systems. Laboratory includes both gross and microscopic structure and function. Additional fee required. (One year each of high school biology and chemistry or the equivalent strongly recommended.) GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.CHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with LabCHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.An introduction to the principles of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, including a study of atoms, chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions (focusing on ones in the cell), solution chemistry, introduction of biological molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids). This course is intended for students desiring a general education in chemistry, those majoring in nursing or allied health fields and those that need it to fulfill the chemistry requirement for cell biology and genetics course. Prerequisite: MATH1280 or one year of high school algebra (C or better strongly recommended). Additional fees required. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesCHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with LabCHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.This course will expose students to the field of forensic science primarily using chemical forensics and testing. Topics include evidence collection and preservation, drugs and drug chemistry, heat and explosions, poisons and others. The course will cover basic chemical concepts needed to plan, execute, and interpret forensic results. All necessary scientific concepts will be developed in the context of forensic science.  Additional fee required.  ELO6 Science - World Citizenship, ELO6 Science - Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesCHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with LabCHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with Lab  - 4 s.h.General Chemistry I Workshop is appropriate for any student interested in developing a strong background in chemistry. It is intended to be the first university chemistry course for science majors. As such, it will be fairly rigorous and will draw upon previous experience in mathematics and science. Major areas to be covered include atomic and molecular structures, chemical bonding, stoichiometric relationships, and chemical reactions. Laboratory activities and experiments are closely related to concepts introduced in class discussions and will allow students to develop their laboratory skills. Good safety practices and experimental record keeping will be stressed. Students are expected to actively participate in class activities and discussions in addition to homework assignments, individual/group study and preparation for exams. Course is intended for biology, chemistry, and some allied health majors.  Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. Prerequisites: MATH1280 and CHEM1310 or one year of high school chemistry.  EL06 Science, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.COMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.COMM2110Intercultural CommunicationCOMM2110Intercultural Communication  - 3 s.h.An examination of concepts that have application to communication across cultural boundaries, with emphasis on relating them to effective intercultural communication skGE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. ELO4 Global Learning - World Citizenship, ELO4 Global Learning - Equality and Peace, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

+This course is only offered every other year.COMM2500Introduction to Mass MediaCOMM2500Introduction to Mass Media  - 3 s.h.An examination of the various landmark theories, such as rhetorical, Marxist, and feminist to analyze popular culture, with an emphasis on the importance of communication in the production and consumption of culture. Students will study the development of culture by applying different theories or 'lenses' to cultural artifacts including music, movies, advertisements, clothing, etc. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

+This course is only offered every other year.ECON1300Principles of MacroeconomicsECON1300Principles of Macroeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, national income, international trade and finance, fiscal policy, monetary policy, money, and banking. Prerequisite: 1 year high school algebra; geometry recommended. ELO5 Social Science - World Citizenship, ELO5 Social Science - InnovationECON1320Principles of MicroeconomicsECON1320Principles of Microeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, production, market structures, and a survey of contemporary economic problems, e.g. sustainability. ELO5 Social Science - SustainabilityEDUC2120Human RelationsEDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.ENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and ArgumentationENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and Argumentation  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course that is meant to develop students’ academic research processes. Students should expect to engage in work that is framed for “public” audiences outside of the classroom and to practice collaboration in research and writing processes.  As the final course of the foundational communication skills sequence, students will be encouraged to use research processes to gain an awareness of topics and conversations happening in the larger social world.  In order for students to complete the foundational skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010 and COMM1100 or HONR2010. ELO1B Communication, GE1C Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.ENGL2370World LiteratureENGL2370World Literature  - 3 s.h.Examines literary works by authors from a broad range of artistic and cultural traditions. Designed to offer students an introduction to literature as a point of access into global communities such as Western European, Middle Eastern, African, Asian, Indigenous, and Latinx. ELO5 Humanities - World Citizenship, ELO5 Humanities - Sustainability, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. +This course is only offered every other year.ENGL2510Introduction to FilmENGL2510Introduction to Film  - 3 s.h.Study of cinema as an artistic endeavor, form of rhetoric, cultural mirror, and purveyor of ideology. Introduces the fundamentals of the discipline, to include vocabulary, concepts of film production, film reception, film analysis, film interpretation, and film criticism. Exploration of the artistic, commercial, entertainment, and ideological relationships between cinema and American culture, along with practice in the film literacy skills needed to qualitatively assess and communicate cinema’s artistic and cultural contributions. ELO5 Humanities - Innovation, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.ENGL2903Topics in LiteratureENGL2903Topics in Literature  - 3 s.h.Special studies in Literature designed primarily for the non-English major. Content may vary and will be announced at time of offering. When content changes, course may be repeated for credit. GE3C Liberal Learning-HumanitiesENGL3480Cultural StudiesENGL3480Cultural Studies  - 3 s.h.Explores cultural systems of meaning and attendant issues of power, particularly in terms of class, gender, nation, race, nature, and sexuality. Emphasis on commercial and media culture. ELO5 Humanities - Equality, ELO5 Humanities - Equality and Peace.

+This course is only offered every other year.HIST1200History of the African DiasporaHIST1200History of the African Diaspora  - 3 s.h.A history of the people of African descent in the Americas, including the United States, as well as the Caribbean, Central and South America. Issues of survival and resistance, the persistence of racism and white supremacy, and struggles for freedom, across countries and time periods, will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - Equality, ELO5 Histories - Equality and Peace, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HIST1560United States Environmental HistoryHIST1560United States Environmental History  - 3 s.h.An examination of the complex relationship between human society and nature from early settlements to the present in what is now the United States. Important topics include the impact of human settlement, population growth, use of land and natural resources, the effects of industrialization, and the development of the conservation and environmental movements. ELO5 Histories - Sustainability, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HIST2420United States History Since 1877HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HONR1010Honors 101HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HONR2010Honors 201HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal ArtsMATH1200Mathematics for Liberal Arts  - 3 s.h.An overview of selected applications of mathematics for non-majors. Graph theory, cryptography, and voting theory. ELO6 MathMATH1280College AlgebraMATH1280College Algebra  - 3 s.h.Solutions of polynomial, rational and radical equations, systems of equations, matrices, sequences, series, functions, exponentials.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1370Statistics for SciencesMATH1370Statistics for Sciences  - 3 s.h.Data analysis and measures of central tendency, dispersion, and correlation. Introduction to probability. Estimation and hypothesis testing. Bivariate regression. ANOVA. Introduction to nonparametric techniques. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1500Applied CalculusMATH1500Applied Calculus  - 3 s.h.An introduction to differential and integral calculus. Topics include limits, continuity, differentiation and integration techniques, and applications. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1510Calculus IMATH1510Calculus I  - 4 s.h.Limits, continuity, differentiation, and applications including exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse functions. Mean value theorem, curve sketching, Riemann sums, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite: 2 years high school algebra. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH2350Discrete MathematicsMATH2350Discrete Mathematics  - 3 s.h.A survey of topics in discrete mathematics focusing on introductory logic, methods of mathematical proof, set theory, determinants and matrices, combinatorics, and graph theory. Prerequisite: Instructor approval for non-CSIT/MATH majors, 2 years high school algebra or MATH1280. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social JusticeMUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social Justice  - 3 s.h.This course will focus on how music has historically been used for social justice, activism, and reform both within the United States and worldwide. Additionally, it will foster critical discussion and reflection on a wide range of artistic activism and applied research. What is musical activism? What kind of social responsibilities do music researchers have? Can music be used to bring about social justice? Music has long been used by movements seeking social change. People from around the world have used music as a platform to speak up and sing out about injustices. This course will focus discussion on the sounds and sentiments of social activism in the public sphere and the value and challenge of cultural advocacy in civil society. From protest songs of the Civil Rights Movement, to music concerts for charity causes, to freedom songs of the African Americans, to the Singing Revolution of the country of Estonia, to songs of the LGBTQ movement, to the Sigauque Project in Mozambique, to the protest songs of the American union movement… and so on. Through readings, discussion, and in-depth analysis of these different songs and movements, students would gain knowledge of efforts to bring about both cultural and social change throughout the world. ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.MUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular MusicMUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular Music  - 3 s.h.This course examines the historical significance of popular music in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present. This course will focus on learning how to describe and identify the musical characteristics that differentiate American popular music styles and how they have evolved to create new styles within the pop genre, by focusing on the historical, socio-cultural, political, and economic forces. No formal musical training is necessary to enroll in the course. GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.PSYC1300Introductory PsychologyPSYC1300Introductory Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of psychological methods and thoughts as they relate to human experience and behavior. Topics include the role of the central nervous system in mediating behavior, learning and memory, states of awareness, motivation and emotion, personality, psychological disorders, and therapy. ELO5 Social Science – Innovation, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences.PSYC2250Developmental PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesSCIE1200Integrated Science with LabSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesTHTR1230Theatre and SocietyTHTR1230Theatre and Society  - 3 s.h.Designed to develop an understanding of how Theatre and society coexist in our world. Course fosters an appreciation for the theatre artist’s skills and expertise.  In this course students experience acting, design, and playwriting through collaborative group projects and interactive assignments.  Students will explore the complex relationship between Theatre and society from the past to the present through presentations and class discussions. ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.THTR1310Introduction to StagecraftTHTR1310Introduction to Stagecraft  - 3 s.h.Introduction to the elements and practices of theatrical construction and scene design. Concentration on the techniques of theatrical construction, costume construction, lighting technology, stage mechanics, alternative methods of staging and shifting stage scenery, backstage organization, and development through practical experience of essential woodworking and stagecraft skills. Laboratory session required. Additional fee required. ELO4 Global Learning - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning - Arts.ARTS2330Art History: Innovation and PoliticsARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and JusticeBIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)BIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)CHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with LabCHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with LabCHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with LabCOMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM2110Intercultural CommunicationCOMM2500Introduction to Mass MediaECON1300Principles of MacroeconomicsECON1320Principles of MicroeconomicsEDUC2120Human RelationsENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and ArgumentationENGL2370World LiteratureENGL2510Introduction to FilmENGL2903Topics in LiteratureENGL3480Cultural StudiesHIST1200History of the African DiasporaHIST1560United States Environmental HistoryHIST2420United States History Since 1877HONR1010Honors 101HONR2010Honors 201MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal ArtsMATH1280College AlgebraMATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1370Statistics for SciencesMATH1500Applied CalculusMATH1510Calculus IMATH2350Discrete MathematicsMUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social JusticeMUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular MusicPSYC1300Introductory PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental PsychologySCIE1200Integrated Science with LabTHTR1230Theatre and SocietyTHTR1310Introduction to StagecraftCourse DescriptionsARTS2330Art History: Innovation and Politics  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course exploring topics such as innovation, power, politics, architecture, entertainment, sacred spaces, sustainability, and eco art throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.ARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and Justice  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course that explores topics such as activism, empathy, justice, disability, mental illness, feminism, sexuality, queer art, social and civic engagement, labor, and race throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.BIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesBIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)  - 4 s.h.The study of structure and function of the human body on the cellular, tissue, organ, and organ-system level. All organ systems are discussed. Emphasis is on the anatomy of the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and digestive systems. Laboratory includes both gross and microscopic structure and function. Additional fee required. (One year each of high school biology and chemistry or the equivalent strongly recommended.) GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.CHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.An introduction to the principles of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, including a study of atoms, chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions (focusing on ones in the cell), solution chemistry, introduction of biological molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids). This course is intended for students desiring a general education in chemistry, those majoring in nursing or allied health fields and those that need it to fulfill the chemistry requirement for cell biology and genetics course. Prerequisite: MATH1280 or one year of high school algebra (C or better strongly recommended). Additional fees required. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesCHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.This course will expose students to the field of forensic science primarily using chemical forensics and testing. Topics include evidence collection and preservation, drugs and drug chemistry, heat and explosions, poisons and others. The course will cover basic chemical concepts needed to plan, execute, and interpret forensic results. All necessary scientific concepts will be developed in the context of forensic science.  Additional fee required.  ELO6 Science - World Citizenship, ELO6 Science - Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesCHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with Lab  - 4 s.h.General Chemistry I Workshop is appropriate for any student interested in developing a strong background in chemistry. It is intended to be the first university chemistry course for science majors. As such, it will be fairly rigorous and will draw upon previous experience in mathematics and science. Major areas to be covered include atomic and molecular structures, chemical bonding, stoichiometric relationships, and chemical reactions. Laboratory activities and experiments are closely related to concepts introduced in class discussions and will allow students to develop their laboratory skills. Good safety practices and experimental record keeping will be stressed. Students are expected to actively participate in class activities and discussions in addition to homework assignments, individual/group study and preparation for exams. Course is intended for biology, chemistry, and some allied health majors.  Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. Prerequisites: MATH1280 and CHEM1310 or one year of high school chemistry.  EL06 Science, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.COMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.COMM2110Intercultural Communication  - 3 s.h.An examination of concepts that have application to communication across cultural boundaries, with emphasis on relating them to effective intercultural communication skGE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. ELO4 Global Learning - World Citizenship, ELO4 Global Learning - Equality and Peace, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

+This course is only offered every other year.COMM2500Introduction to Mass Media  - 3 s.h.An examination of the various landmark theories, such as rhetorical, Marxist, and feminist to analyze popular culture, with an emphasis on the importance of communication in the production and consumption of culture. Students will study the development of culture by applying different theories or 'lenses' to cultural artifacts including music, movies, advertisements, clothing, etc. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

+This course is only offered every other year.ECON1300Principles of Macroeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, national income, international trade and finance, fiscal policy, monetary policy, money, and banking. Prerequisite: 1 year high school algebra; geometry recommended. ELO5 Social Science - World Citizenship, ELO5 Social Science - InnovationECON1320Principles of Microeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, production, market structures, and a survey of contemporary economic problems, e.g. sustainability. ELO5 Social Science - SustainabilityEDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.ENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and Argumentation  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course that is meant to develop students’ academic research processes. Students should expect to engage in work that is framed for “public” audiences outside of the classroom and to practice collaboration in research and writing processes.  As the final course of the foundational communication skills sequence, students will be encouraged to use research processes to gain an awareness of topics and conversations happening in the larger social world.  In order for students to complete the foundational skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010 and COMM1100 or HONR2010. ELO1B Communication, GE1C Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.ENGL2370World Literature  - 3 s.h.Examines literary works by authors from a broad range of artistic and cultural traditions. Designed to offer students an introduction to literature as a point of access into global communities such as Western European, Middle Eastern, African, Asian, Indigenous, and Latinx. ELO5 Humanities - World Citizenship, ELO5 Humanities - Sustainability, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. +This course is only offered every other year.ENGL2510Introduction to Film  - 3 s.h.Study of cinema as an artistic endeavor, form of rhetoric, cultural mirror, and purveyor of ideology. Introduces the fundamentals of the discipline, to include vocabulary, concepts of film production, film reception, film analysis, film interpretation, and film criticism. Exploration of the artistic, commercial, entertainment, and ideological relationships between cinema and American culture, along with practice in the film literacy skills needed to qualitatively assess and communicate cinema’s artistic and cultural contributions. ELO5 Humanities - Innovation, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.ENGL2903Topics in Literature  - 3 s.h.Special studies in Literature designed primarily for the non-English major. Content may vary and will be announced at time of offering. When content changes, course may be repeated for credit. GE3C Liberal Learning-HumanitiesENGL3480Cultural Studies  - 3 s.h.Explores cultural systems of meaning and attendant issues of power, particularly in terms of class, gender, nation, race, nature, and sexuality. Emphasis on commercial and media culture. ELO5 Humanities - Equality, ELO5 Humanities - Equality and Peace.

+This course is only offered every other year.HIST1200History of the African Diaspora  - 3 s.h.A history of the people of African descent in the Americas, including the United States, as well as the Caribbean, Central and South America. Issues of survival and resistance, the persistence of racism and white supremacy, and struggles for freedom, across countries and time periods, will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - Equality, ELO5 Histories - Equality and Peace, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HIST1560United States Environmental History  - 3 s.h.An examination of the complex relationship between human society and nature from early settlements to the present in what is now the United States. Important topics include the impact of human settlement, population growth, use of land and natural resources, the effects of industrialization, and the development of the conservation and environmental movements. ELO5 Histories - Sustainability, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal Arts  - 3 s.h.An overview of selected applications of mathematics for non-majors. Graph theory, cryptography, and voting theory. ELO6 MathMATH1280College Algebra  - 3 s.h.Solutions of polynomial, rational and radical equations, systems of equations, matrices, sequences, series, functions, exponentials.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1370Statistics for Sciences  - 3 s.h.Data analysis and measures of central tendency, dispersion, and correlation. Introduction to probability. Estimation and hypothesis testing. Bivariate regression. ANOVA. Introduction to nonparametric techniques. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1500Applied Calculus  - 3 s.h.An introduction to differential and integral calculus. Topics include limits, continuity, differentiation and integration techniques, and applications. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1510Calculus I  - 4 s.h.Limits, continuity, differentiation, and applications including exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse functions. Mean value theorem, curve sketching, Riemann sums, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite: 2 years high school algebra. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH2350Discrete Mathematics  - 3 s.h.A survey of topics in discrete mathematics focusing on introductory logic, methods of mathematical proof, set theory, determinants and matrices, combinatorics, and graph theory. Prerequisite: Instructor approval for non-CSIT/MATH majors, 2 years high school algebra or MATH1280. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social Justice  - 3 s.h.This course will focus on how music has historically been used for social justice, activism, and reform both within the United States and worldwide. Additionally, it will foster critical discussion and reflection on a wide range of artistic activism and applied research. What is musical activism? What kind of social responsibilities do music researchers have? Can music be used to bring about social justice? Music has long been used by movements seeking social change. People from around the world have used music as a platform to speak up and sing out about injustices. This course will focus discussion on the sounds and sentiments of social activism in the public sphere and the value and challenge of cultural advocacy in civil society. From protest songs of the Civil Rights Movement, to music concerts for charity causes, to freedom songs of the African Americans, to the Singing Revolution of the country of Estonia, to songs of the LGBTQ movement, to the Sigauque Project in Mozambique, to the protest songs of the American union movement… and so on. Through readings, discussion, and in-depth analysis of these different songs and movements, students would gain knowledge of efforts to bring about both cultural and social change throughout the world. ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.MUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular Music  - 3 s.h.This course examines the historical significance of popular music in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present. This course will focus on learning how to describe and identify the musical characteristics that differentiate American popular music styles and how they have evolved to create new styles within the pop genre, by focusing on the historical, socio-cultural, political, and economic forces. No formal musical training is necessary to enroll in the course. GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.PSYC1300Introductory Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of psychological methods and thoughts as they relate to human experience and behavior. Topics include the role of the central nervous system in mediating behavior, learning and memory, states of awareness, motivation and emotion, personality, psychological disorders, and therapy. ELO5 Social Science – Innovation, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences.PSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesTHTR1230Theatre and Society  - 3 s.h.Designed to develop an understanding of how Theatre and society coexist in our world. Course fosters an appreciation for the theatre artist’s skills and expertise.  In this course students experience acting, design, and playwriting through collaborative group projects and interactive assignments.  Students will explore the complex relationship between Theatre and society from the past to the present through presentations and class discussions. ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.THTR1310Introduction to Stagecraft  - 3 s.h.Introduction to the elements and practices of theatrical construction and scene design. Concentration on the techniques of theatrical construction, costume construction, lighting technology, stage mechanics, alternative methods of staging and shifting stage scenery, backstage organization, and development through practical experience of essential woodworking and stagecraft skills. Laboratory session required. Additional fee required. ELO4 Global Learning - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning - Arts.
- ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing Skills orHONR1010Honors 101
- COMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking orHONR2010Honors 201
- ENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and Argumentation
- MATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking
- MATH1370Statistics for Sciences
- MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal Arts
- MATH1280College Algebra
- MATH1310Mathematical Concepts
- MATH1500Applied Calculus
- MATH1510Calculus I
- MATH2350Discrete Mathematics
- ARTS2330Art History: Innovation and Politics
- ARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy, and Justice
- One studio art or graphic design course with no prerequisite
- MUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social Justice
- MUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular Music
- 3 credits ensemble participation from one specific area (vocal/instrumental) All three credits must be earned in one area.
- THTR1230Theatre and Society
- THTR1310Introduction to Stagecraft
- HIST1200History of the African Diaspora
- HIST1560Environmental History
- HIST2420United States History Since 1877
- COMM2110Intercultural Communication
- COMM2500Introduction to Mass Media
- ENGL2510Introduction to Film
- ENGL2370World Literatures
- ENGL2903Topics in Literature
- ENGL3480Cultural Studies
- BIOL/CHEM1200Environmental Science
- BIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I
- CHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry
- CHEM1340Forensic Chemistry
- CHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop
- SCIE1200Integrated Science
- ECON1300Principles of Macroeconomics
- ECON1320Principles of Microeconomics
- EDUC2120Human Relations
- PSYC1300Introductory Psychology
- PSYC2250Developmental Psychology
- ARTS2330Art History: Innovation and PoliticsARTS2330Art History: Innovation and Politics  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course exploring topics such as innovation, power, politics, architecture, entertainment, sacred spaces, sustainability, and eco art throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.
- ARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and JusticeARTS3110Art History: Activism, Empathy and Justice  - 3 s.h.Theme-based art history course that explores topics such as activism, empathy, justice, disability, mental illness, feminism, sexuality, queer art, social and civic engagement, labor, and race throughout art history to the present.  ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.
- BIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)BIOL1200Environmental Science with Lab (also CHEM1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- BIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)BIOL2300Anatomy and Physiology I with Lab (3-2)  - 4 s.h.The study of structure and function of the human body on the cellular, tissue, organ, and organ-system level. All organ systems are discussed. Emphasis is on the anatomy of the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and digestive systems. Laboratory includes both gross and microscopic structure and function. Additional fee required. (One year each of high school biology and chemistry or the equivalent strongly recommended.) GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.
- CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)CHEM1200Environmental Science with Lab (also BIOL1200)  - 4 s.h.An exploration of the biotic and abiotic components of the environment, including the biological, physical, and chemical processes that shape natural ecosystems (e.g., biogeochemical cycles). The course will also examine the impact of human population growth, resource use, emissions production, and technological innovations on the environment. Current environmental issues, such as loss of biodiversity, ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution, and climate change, will be considered.  Additional fee required. ELO6 Science -  Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.
- CHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with LabCHEM1330Introduction to General, Organic, and Biochemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.An introduction to the principles of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, including a study of atoms, chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions (focusing on ones in the cell), solution chemistry, introduction of biological molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids). This course is intended for students desiring a general education in chemistry, those majoring in nursing or allied health fields and those that need it to fulfill the chemistry requirement for cell biology and genetics course. Prerequisite: MATH1280 or one year of high school algebra (C or better strongly recommended). Additional fees required. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- CHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with LabCHEM1340Forensic Chemistry with Lab  - 4 s.h.This course will expose students to the field of forensic science primarily using chemical forensics and testing. Topics include evidence collection and preservation, drugs and drug chemistry, heat and explosions, poisons and others. The course will cover basic chemical concepts needed to plan, execute, and interpret forensic results. All necessary scientific concepts will be developed in the context of forensic science.  Additional fee required.  ELO6 Science - World Citizenship, ELO6 Science - Innovation, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- CHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with LabCHEM1410General Chemistry I Workshop with Lab  - 4 s.h.General Chemistry I Workshop is appropriate for any student interested in developing a strong background in chemistry. It is intended to be the first university chemistry course for science majors. As such, it will be fairly rigorous and will draw upon previous experience in mathematics and science. Major areas to be covered include atomic and molecular structures, chemical bonding, stoichiometric relationships, and chemical reactions. Laboratory activities and experiments are closely related to concepts introduced in class discussions and will allow students to develop their laboratory skills. Good safety practices and experimental record keeping will be stressed. Students are expected to actively participate in class activities and discussions in addition to homework assignments, individual/group study and preparation for exams. Course is intended for biology, chemistry, and some allied health majors.  Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. Prerequisites: MATH1280 and CHEM1310 or one year of high school chemistry.  EL06 Science, GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences.
- COMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- COMM2110Intercultural CommunicationCOMM2110Intercultural Communication  - 3 s.h.An examination of concepts that have application to communication across cultural boundaries, with emphasis on relating them to effective intercultural communication skGE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. ELO4 Global Learning - World Citizenship, ELO4 Global Learning - Equality and Peace, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.

+This course is only offered every other year.
- COMM2500Introduction to Mass MediaCOMM2500Introduction to Mass Media  - 3 s.h.An examination of the various landmark theories, such as rhetorical, Marxist, and feminist to analyze popular culture, with an emphasis on the importance of communication in the production and consumption of culture. Students will study the development of culture by applying different theories or 'lenses' to cultural artifacts including music, movies, advertisements, clothing, etc. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities

+This course is only offered every other year.
- ECON1300Principles of MacroeconomicsECON1300Principles of Macroeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, national income, international trade and finance, fiscal policy, monetary policy, money, and banking. Prerequisite: 1 year high school algebra; geometry recommended. ELO5 Social Science - World Citizenship, ELO5 Social Science - Innovation
- ECON1320Principles of MicroeconomicsECON1320Principles of Microeconomics  - 3 s.h.Analysis of the fundamental principles of the American economic system, centering on price, production, market structures, and a survey of contemporary economic problems, e.g. sustainability. ELO5 Social Science - Sustainability
- EDUC2120Human RelationsEDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences
- ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- ENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and ArgumentationENGL2110Composition II: Research Writing and Argumentation  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course that is meant to develop students’ academic research processes. Students should expect to engage in work that is framed for “public” audiences outside of the classroom and to practice collaboration in research and writing processes.  As the final course of the foundational communication skills sequence, students will be encouraged to use research processes to gain an awareness of topics and conversations happening in the larger social world.  In order for students to complete the foundational skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010 and COMM1100 or HONR2010. ELO1B Communication, GE1C Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- ENGL2370World LiteratureENGL2370World Literature  - 3 s.h.Examines literary works by authors from a broad range of artistic and cultural traditions. Designed to offer students an introduction to literature as a point of access into global communities such as Western European, Middle Eastern, African, Asian, Indigenous, and Latinx. ELO5 Humanities - World Citizenship, ELO5 Humanities - Sustainability, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities. +This course is only offered every other year.
- ENGL2510Introduction to FilmENGL2510Introduction to Film  - 3 s.h.Study of cinema as an artistic endeavor, form of rhetoric, cultural mirror, and purveyor of ideology. Introduces the fundamentals of the discipline, to include vocabulary, concepts of film production, film reception, film analysis, film interpretation, and film criticism. Exploration of the artistic, commercial, entertainment, and ideological relationships between cinema and American culture, along with practice in the film literacy skills needed to qualitatively assess and communicate cinema’s artistic and cultural contributions. ELO5 Humanities - Innovation, GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities.
- ENGL2903Topics in LiteratureENGL2903Topics in Literature  - 3 s.h.Special studies in Literature designed primarily for the non-English major. Content may vary and will be announced at time of offering. When content changes, course may be repeated for credit. GE3C Liberal Learning-Humanities
- ENGL3480Cultural StudiesENGL3480Cultural Studies  - 3 s.h.Explores cultural systems of meaning and attendant issues of power, particularly in terms of class, gender, nation, race, nature, and sexuality. Emphasis on commercial and media culture. ELO5 Humanities - Equality, ELO5 Humanities - Equality and Peace.

+This course is only offered every other year.
- HIST1200History of the African DiasporaHIST1200History of the African Diaspora  - 3 s.h.A history of the people of African descent in the Americas, including the United States, as well as the Caribbean, Central and South America. Issues of survival and resistance, the persistence of racism and white supremacy, and struggles for freedom, across countries and time periods, will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - Equality, ELO5 Histories - Equality and Peace, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.
- HIST1560United States Environmental HistoryHIST1560United States Environmental History  - 3 s.h.An examination of the complex relationship between human society and nature from early settlements to the present in what is now the United States. Important topics include the impact of human settlement, population growth, use of land and natural resources, the effects of industrialization, and the development of the conservation and environmental movements. ELO5 Histories - Sustainability, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.
- HIST2420United States History Since 1877HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.
- HONR1010Honors 101HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- HONR2010Honors 201HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- MATH1200Mathematics for Liberal ArtsMATH1200Mathematics for Liberal Arts  - 3 s.h.An overview of selected applications of mathematics for non-majors. Graph theory, cryptography, and voting theory. ELO6 Math
- MATH1280College AlgebraMATH1280College Algebra  - 3 s.h.Solutions of polynomial, rational and radical equations, systems of equations, matrices, sequences, series, functions, exponentials.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1370Statistics for SciencesMATH1370Statistics for Sciences  - 3 s.h.Data analysis and measures of central tendency, dispersion, and correlation. Introduction to probability. Estimation and hypothesis testing. Bivariate regression. ANOVA. Introduction to nonparametric techniques. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1500Applied CalculusMATH1500Applied Calculus  - 3 s.h.An introduction to differential and integral calculus. Topics include limits, continuity, differentiation and integration techniques, and applications. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1510Calculus IMATH1510Calculus I  - 4 s.h.Limits, continuity, differentiation, and applications including exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and inverse functions. Mean value theorem, curve sketching, Riemann sums, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite: 2 years high school algebra. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH2350Discrete MathematicsMATH2350Discrete Mathematics  - 3 s.h.A survey of topics in discrete mathematics focusing on introductory logic, methods of mathematical proof, set theory, determinants and matrices, combinatorics, and graph theory. Prerequisite: Instructor approval for non-CSIT/MATH majors, 2 years high school algebra or MATH1280. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social JusticeMUSC3340Musical Citizenship: Artistic Activism and Social Justice  - 3 s.h.This course will focus on how music has historically been used for social justice, activism, and reform both within the United States and worldwide. Additionally, it will foster critical discussion and reflection on a wide range of artistic activism and applied research. What is musical activism? What kind of social responsibilities do music researchers have? Can music be used to bring about social justice? Music has long been used by movements seeking social change. People from around the world have used music as a platform to speak up and sing out about injustices. This course will focus discussion on the sounds and sentiments of social activism in the public sphere and the value and challenge of cultural advocacy in civil society. From protest songs of the Civil Rights Movement, to music concerts for charity causes, to freedom songs of the African Americans, to the Singing Revolution of the country of Estonia, to songs of the LGBTQ movement, to the Sigauque Project in Mozambique, to the protest songs of the American union movement… and so on. Through readings, discussion, and in-depth analysis of these different songs and movements, students would gain knowledge of efforts to bring about both cultural and social change throughout the world. ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.
- MUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular MusicMUSC3350From Louis Armstrong to Lady Gaga: A History of American Popular Music  - 3 s.h.This course examines the historical significance of popular music in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present. This course will focus on learning how to describe and identify the musical characteristics that differentiate American popular music styles and how they have evolved to create new styles within the pop genre, by focusing on the historical, socio-cultural, political, and economic forces. No formal musical training is necessary to enroll in the course. GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.
- PSYC1300Introductory PsychologyPSYC1300Introductory Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of psychological methods and thoughts as they relate to human experience and behavior. Topics include the role of the central nervous system in mediating behavior, learning and memory, states of awareness, motivation and emotion, personality, psychological disorders, and therapy. ELO5 Social Science – Innovation, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences.
- PSYC2250Developmental PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences
- SCIE1200Integrated Science with LabSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- THTR1230Theatre and SocietyTHTR1230Theatre and Society  - 3 s.h.Designed to develop an understanding of how Theatre and society coexist in our world. Course fosters an appreciation for the theatre artist’s skills and expertise.  In this course students experience acting, design, and playwriting through collaborative group projects and interactive assignments.  Students will explore the complex relationship between Theatre and society from the past to the present through presentations and class discussions. ELO5 Arts - Equality, ELO5 Arts - Equality and Peace, GE3A Liberal Learning-Arts.
- THTR1310Introduction to StagecraftTHTR1310Introduction to Stagecraft  - 3 s.h.Introduction to the elements and practices of theatrical construction and scene design. Concentration on the techniques of theatrical construction, costume construction, lighting technology, stage mechanics, alternative methods of staging and shifting stage scenery, backstage organization, and development through practical experience of essential woodworking and stagecraft skills. Laboratory session required. Additional fee required. ELO4 Global Learning - Innovation, GE3A Liberal Learning - Arts.
- Alternative General Education ProgramAlternative General Education ProgramStudents entering Graceland with 48 or more s.h. of transfer credit or students entering online or completion programs automatically qualify for the Alternative General Education program. Students must complete a total of 33 s.h. including:3 s.h. in each of the following areas:speech, college-level mathematics, and natural science.6 s.h. incollege composition.9 s.h. in each of the following areas:humanities(literature, philosophy, religion, art, music, theatre, and foreign language courses),social sciences(economics, psychology, sociology, anthropology, political science/government, geography, history).
- 3 s.h. in each of the following areas:speech, college-level mathematics, and natural science.
- 6 s.h. incollege composition.
- 9 s.h. in each of the following areas:humanities(literature, philosophy, religion, art, music, theatre, and foreign language courses),social sciences(economics, psychology, sociology, anthropology, political science/government, geography, history).
- Life and LeadershipLife and LeadershipDesigned to correlate students’ extracurricular activities with what they learn in the classrooms, the 12 credit hours spread over the 4 years provides a systematic application of leadership principles to real world experience, with each year bringing an increasingly broad focus to this component of the Transformational Leadership Major.The Life and Leadership sequence of courses includes the following courses. (12 s.h.)LEAD1300Self-LeadershipLEAD2300Group LeadershipLEAD3300Organizational LeadershipLEAD4300Leadership Capstone or one of the following:– Equivalent capstone courses in Education and Nursing majors–HONR4800Senior Honors Seminar– A 4000-level external internship in other majors.Courses OfferedLEAD1300Self-LeadershipLEAD1300Self-Leadership  - 2 s.h.Exposes new students to the broad opportunities of the institution; and integrates new students into the life of the institution. Students will explore, apply, and reflect upon themes centering around communication, organization, collaboration, listening, and self-awareness. Students will understand the opportunity to engage in co-curricular circles, develop inside-and-outside-the-classroom identity, recognize leadership styles, and continue reflection of self-growth and leadership development.LEAD2300Group LeadershipLEAD2300Group Leadership  - 2 s.h.Integrates personal life and leadership skills into the group setting while introducing additional complementary topics such as: stages of group development, extrinsic/intrinsic motivation, emotional intelligence, inclusivity, trust, group dynamics, conflict resolution, group roles, and integrity. Students will understand the roles of Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in group leadership.LEAD3300Organizational LeadershipLEAD3300Organizational Leadership  - 2 s.h.Applies leadership skills beyond individuals and groups to the organizational level. Students will explore social intelligence, conflict management and resolution, bias assessment, information collection, and evidence assessment. Students will enroll in, complete, and reflect upon assigned SkillPath Leadership courses. Students will apply Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in organizational leadership.LEAD4300Leadership CapstoneLEAD4300Leadership Capstone  - 2 s.h.The capstone course of the LEAD series at Graceland University is an integrated and applied experience mentored by acknowledged leaders at the university or by external educational, business, or health care mentors outside the university.   Students will apply and share with the university their holistic development as a student over their time at Graceland University including their development both inside and outside the classroom to build confidence in the leadership skills they have developed for their futures via a portfolio addressing these applied and reflective topics.LEAD1300Self-LeadershipLEAD2300Group LeadershipLEAD3300Organizational LeadershipLEAD4300Leadership CapstoneCourse DescriptionsLEAD1300Self-Leadership  - 2 s.h.Exposes new students to the broad opportunities of the institution; and integrates new students into the life of the institution. Students will explore, apply, and reflect upon themes centering around communication, organization, collaboration, listening, and self-awareness. Students will understand the opportunity to engage in co-curricular circles, develop inside-and-outside-the-classroom identity, recognize leadership styles, and continue reflection of self-growth and leadership development.LEAD2300Group Leadership  - 2 s.h.Integrates personal life and leadership skills into the group setting while introducing additional complementary topics such as: stages of group development, extrinsic/intrinsic motivation, emotional intelligence, inclusivity, trust, group dynamics, conflict resolution, group roles, and integrity. Students will understand the roles of Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in group leadership.LEAD3300Organizational Leadership  - 2 s.h.Applies leadership skills beyond individuals and groups to the organizational level. Students will explore social intelligence, conflict management and resolution, bias assessment, information collection, and evidence assessment. Students will enroll in, complete, and reflect upon assigned SkillPath Leadership courses. Students will apply Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in organizational leadership.LEAD4300Leadership Capstone  - 2 s.h.The capstone course of the LEAD series at Graceland University is an integrated and applied experience mentored by acknowledged leaders at the university or by external educational, business, or health care mentors outside the university.   Students will apply and share with the university their holistic development as a student over their time at Graceland University including their development both inside and outside the classroom to build confidence in the leadership skills they have developed for their futures via a portfolio addressing these applied and reflective topics.
- LEAD1300Self-Leadership
- LEAD2300Group Leadership
- LEAD3300Organizational Leadership
- LEAD4300Leadership Capstone or one of the following:– Equivalent capstone courses in Education and Nursing majors–HONR4800Senior Honors Seminar– A 4000-level external internship in other majors.
- LEAD1300Self-LeadershipLEAD1300Self-Leadership  - 2 s.h.Exposes new students to the broad opportunities of the institution; and integrates new students into the life of the institution. Students will explore, apply, and reflect upon themes centering around communication, organization, collaboration, listening, and self-awareness. Students will understand the opportunity to engage in co-curricular circles, develop inside-and-outside-the-classroom identity, recognize leadership styles, and continue reflection of self-growth and leadership development.
- LEAD2300Group LeadershipLEAD2300Group Leadership  - 2 s.h.Integrates personal life and leadership skills into the group setting while introducing additional complementary topics such as: stages of group development, extrinsic/intrinsic motivation, emotional intelligence, inclusivity, trust, group dynamics, conflict resolution, group roles, and integrity. Students will understand the roles of Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in group leadership.
- LEAD3300Organizational LeadershipLEAD3300Organizational Leadership  - 2 s.h.Applies leadership skills beyond individuals and groups to the organizational level. Students will explore social intelligence, conflict management and resolution, bias assessment, information collection, and evidence assessment. Students will enroll in, complete, and reflect upon assigned SkillPath Leadership courses. Students will apply Higher-order Thinking, Character, Social Responsibility, Holistic Well-Being, and Digital Citizenship in organizational leadership.
- LEAD4300Leadership CapstoneLEAD4300Leadership Capstone  - 2 s.h.The capstone course of the LEAD series at Graceland University is an integrated and applied experience mentored by acknowledged leaders at the university or by external educational, business, or health care mentors outside the university.   Students will apply and share with the university their holistic development as a student over their time at Graceland University including their development both inside and outside the classroom to build confidence in the leadership skills they have developed for their futures via a portfolio addressing these applied and reflective topics.
- Strategic SkillsStrategic SkillsThese three courses set students on a path to developing strategic skills in the respective areas fundamental to the mission of Graceland University. Students are introduced to and explore a variety of concepts important to these subject areas and which give them skills to use throughout their lifetimes.The Strategic Skills sequence includes the following courses. (9 s.h.)UNIV1100Digital Fluency and CitizenshipUNIV1200Health and WholenessUNIV2100Social ResponsibilityCourses OfferedUNIV1100Digital Fluency and CitizenshipUNIV1100Digital Fluency and Citizenship  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the concepts of responsible activity and practices in the digital world, important software tools, and understanding the use of data and data analytics in the digital economy.  The course teaches students relevant skills necessary to analyze data, prepare visualizations of data, and engage in the digital economy.UNIV1200Health and WholenessUNIV1200Health and Wholeness  - 3 s.h.Introduces students to foundational concepts in health and wellness as well as practices that promote life-long wholeness, including physical and mental health risk assessment and mitigation.UNIV2100Social ResponsibilityUNIV2100Social Responsibility  - 3 s.h.Provides students an introductory foundation in social responsibility and ethics in the context of moral, social, and environmental issues. Students will be given the opportunity to understand how personal views, choices, privileges, and behaviors impact their communities and those of other individuals. Students will learn to engage in compassionate and constructive dialogue about diverse perspectives.UNIV1100Digital Fluency and CitizenshipUNIV1200Health and WholenessUNIV2100Social ResponsibilityCourse DescriptionsUNIV1100Digital Fluency and Citizenship  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the concepts of responsible activity and practices in the digital world, important software tools, and understanding the use of data and data analytics in the digital economy.  The course teaches students relevant skills necessary to analyze data, prepare visualizations of data, and engage in the digital economy.UNIV1200Health and Wholeness  - 3 s.h.Introduces students to foundational concepts in health and wellness as well as practices that promote life-long wholeness, including physical and mental health risk assessment and mitigation.UNIV2100Social Responsibility  - 3 s.h.Provides students an introductory foundation in social responsibility and ethics in the context of moral, social, and environmental issues. Students will be given the opportunity to understand how personal views, choices, privileges, and behaviors impact their communities and those of other individuals. Students will learn to engage in compassionate and constructive dialogue about diverse perspectives.
- UNIV1100Digital Fluency and Citizenship
- UNIV1200Health and Wholeness
- UNIV2100Social Responsibility
- UNIV1100Digital Fluency and CitizenshipUNIV1100Digital Fluency and Citizenship  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the concepts of responsible activity and practices in the digital world, important software tools, and understanding the use of data and data analytics in the digital economy.  The course teaches students relevant skills necessary to analyze data, prepare visualizations of data, and engage in the digital economy.
- UNIV1200Health and WholenessUNIV1200Health and Wholeness  - 3 s.h.Introduces students to foundational concepts in health and wellness as well as practices that promote life-long wholeness, including physical and mental health risk assessment and mitigation.
- UNIV2100Social ResponsibilityUNIV2100Social Responsibility  - 3 s.h.Provides students an introductory foundation in social responsibility and ethics in the context of moral, social, and environmental issues. Students will be given the opportunity to understand how personal views, choices, privileges, and behaviors impact their communities and those of other individuals. Students will learn to engage in compassionate and constructive dialogue about diverse perspectives.
- First time Freshmen will move into LEAD1300 in the Fall and Spring Semesters.
- Freshman transfer students will move directly into LEAD1300 regardless of Fall or Spring start.
- Transfer students (spring Freshman level to spring Junior level) simply join into the sequenced course where non-transfers would be. (Spring Freshman transfer LEAD1300, Fall sophomore transfer LEAD2300, etc.)
- he/she has earned at least 24 semester hours that apply to the second major after completion of the first, and
- the two majors normally lead to two different degrees (BA, BS, BSN)
- Fall Commencement Ceremony – Independence, MOThe only ceremony for those earning graduate degrees during the academic year – MEd, MAR, MNHP, MS, MSN, and DNP. Verification by the Registrar that all degree requirements are anticipated to be completed by the end of the spring trimester will permit participation in the Fall Ceremony. Petitions are not required for these graduates to participate.The only ceremony for those earning School of Nursing baccalaureate degrees during that academic year — BA, BAH, BSN, and BSNH. Verification by the Registrar that all degree requirements are anticipated to be completed by the end of the spring trimester will permit participation in the Fall Ceremony. Petitions are not required for these graduates to participate.An optional ceremony for all other baccalaureate graduates during the academic year.Petitionsare required for graduates who anticipate completion of requirements by the end of the spring trimester/semester.Petitionsare considered by the Curricular Adjustment Committee (CAC).
- The only ceremony for those earning graduate degrees during the academic year – MEd, MAR, MNHP, MS, MSN, and DNP. Verification by the Registrar that all degree requirements are anticipated to be completed by the end of the spring trimester will permit participation in the Fall Ceremony. Petitions are not required for these graduates to participate.
- The only ceremony for those earning School of Nursing baccalaureate degrees during that academic year — BA, BAH, BSN, and BSNH. Verification by the Registrar that all degree requirements are anticipated to be completed by the end of the spring trimester will permit participation in the Fall Ceremony. Petitions are not required for these graduates to participate.
- An optional ceremony for all other baccalaureate graduates during the academic year.Petitionsare required for graduates who anticipate completion of requirements by the end of the spring trimester/semester.Petitionsare considered by the Curricular Adjustment Committee (CAC).
- Spring Commencement Ceremony – Lamoni, IAThe ceremony for those earning baccalaureate degrees during the academic year, excluding School of Nursing BA, BAH, BSN and BSNH.Petitionsare required for graduates who want to participate in the ceremony and are not registered for all required courses, but anticipate completion of requirements by the end of the calendar year.Petitionsare considered by the Curricular Adjustment Committee (CAC).
- The ceremony for those earning baccalaureate degrees during the academic year, excluding School of Nursing BA, BAH, BSN and BSNH.Petitionsare required for graduates who want to participate in the ceremony and are not registered for all required courses, but anticipate completion of requirements by the end of the calendar year.Petitionsare considered by the Curricular Adjustment Committee (CAC).
- Graduates who finish degree requirements during the academic year will attend a ceremony during that academic year, and will not be allowed to choose to attend a ceremony during the next academic year.
- Privacy Overview
- Strictly Necessary Cookies
- 3rd Party Cookies
