# Bachelor of Arts in Elementary Education | Graceland University

Source URL: http://www.graceland.edu/education#top

Enroll in our flexible, accelerated, and collaborative elementary education program for future educators. Graceland will send you out into a world that needs great teachers.

Bachelor of Arts DegreeIndependence Campus

Graceland’s Elementary Education (BAEd) program at our Independence, Missouri, campus is designed to provide future educators with a flexible path to teaching young minds through a unique curriculum that allows them to complete their degree in two years or less. We understand the demand for teachers now more than ever, which is why we are dedicatedWhy Graceland?EVENING CLASSESgive our future educators the ability to continue working while they finish their coursework.OurCOHORT MODELdelivers opportunities for collaboration with a community of peers.Graceland’sSMALL CLASS SIZESprovide the opportunity to forge relationships with their nationally recognized instructors, fostering mentors for their success.Attend convenient classesTWO NIGHTS A WEEK.So,why Graceland?Because, Graceland provides students with tailored, flexible, accelerated, collaborative opportunities for our future elementary educators. We want to make the world a better place for our young students, and educators who come out of our elementary education program are well-equipped to do just that.

Graceland’s Elementary Education (BAEd) program at our Independence, Missouri, campus is designed to provide future educators with a flexible path to teaching young minds through a unique curriculum that allows them to complete their degree in two years or less. We understand the demand for teachers now more than ever, which is why we are dedicated

In addition to the general education requirements,majors in Elementary Education must complete the Education requirements and one approved concentration:

Education Requirements:

*A Computer Science course will not meet the mathematics elective.

**Students with majors in Elementary Education and another teaching discipline who are seeking endorsements at both the elementary and secondary levels should substituteEDUC4450 Combination Student Teaching. Students with a concentration in K-8 Mild/Moderate Special Education should substituteEDUC4460 Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching.

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Emphasis is upon social, historical, and philosophical foundations of education; ethics; reflection; and professional development. Includes a series of observation and teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. Students must earn a grade of C or higher in this class for admittance into Teacher Education and to enroll in junior-level education classes. (Additional background check fee required.)

A robust series of well-sequenced early clinical field experiences that connect to and integrate the content of EDUC1400. Students will observe and participate in teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.

Acquire information pertaining to teacher education requirements and candidate responsibilities for the program assessment system. Take the GSOE entrance assessment, PRAXIS II preparation plan, among other requirements for program participation. Required for all transfer students during their first semester or term at Graceland. (Additional E-Portfolio fee required. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Development of skills and abilities related to learning physical education, health/wellness, visual and performance arts methods for teaching in the preschool and elementary classroom.

A two-week practicum in a middle school classroom. Prerequisites: EDUC3560. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis).

A pre-student teaching practicum of at least 100 clock hours. Work with three age levels: (1) infant and toddler, (2) preprimary, and (3) primary students in two different settings such as rural and urban, and encompassing differing socioeconomic status, ability levels, cultural and linguistic diversity and program types and sponsorship. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3310. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.

A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.

An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of inquiry-based teaching and learning of science. Curriculum and strategies introduced for instructing in the areas of physical, earth/space, and life science. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to science methods included. Prerequisite: EDUC1300, admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of teaching and learning mathematical processes to include problem solving, reasoning, communication, making connections and representations to the real life experiences for student learning. Curriculum, instruction, assessment, diagnosis and evaluation strategies introduced in the areas of numbers/operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, data analysis, and probability. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to math methods included. Prerequisites: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3540.

Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.

Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.

An introduction to the theories and practices connecting psychology and education. The course addresses the social contexts of child development (0-adult), classroom culture, learning, individual differences, social-emotional learning, and their implications related to physical, emotional, and cognitive development of children and the impact on learning. Measurement strategies are introduced and provide an understanding of classroom, local, state, and national assessments.  Prerequisite: EDUC1300

A required two-week internship for Elementary Education majors. Interns with endorsements in English/Language Arts, Health, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies have full-day placements in regular elementary classroom programs. Interns with endorsements in Art, Music and Physical Education have placements in these specialty-area classrooms. Elementary majors may substitute PHED3400. Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Designed for Elementary and Secondary Education teacher candidates with a focus on preparation for professional practice. The integrated study of professional ethics, legal frameworks, and pedagogical responsibilities in and out of the classroom. Emphasis on the assessment of students’ diverse needs and application of effective and culturally relevant instructional and classroom management strategies. An introduction to the Model Code of Ethics for Educators and the Iowa Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics frameworks and their role in professional decision-making.   Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Liberal Studies Program. Enroll during the semester that precedes student teaching.

The seminar is designed to promote a successful transition to student teaching and to provide a forum for peer support. Topics will center on discussions and assignments that merge education program coursework knowledge and teaching practice. The seminar is also designed to assist candidates as they apply for an initial Iowa teaching license and begin the job search. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of elementary student teaching in accordance with the policies in the Teacher Education Handbook. 

Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

* If a candidate with more than one teaching major completes 14 semester hours of student teaching for one major (or endorsements that require student teaching), an additional six semester hours of student teaching will meet the student teaching requirement for the asterisked second teaching major.

Candidates with majors in art, music, and physical education complete 14 weeks of student teaching in art, music, or physical education. Half (7 s.h.) of the experience is secondary level and half is elementary level. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.

This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An introductory survey of selected world civilizations from the emergence of Western Europe as a center of world power. The impact of Western civilizations upon the development of other world civilizations and the contemporary emergence of a global perspective will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - World Citizenship, ELO5 Histories - Innovation.

A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

The nature, philosophy, and history of the United States federal system with major consideration given to the national government, its organization, and the interrelation and functions of its component parts. A consideration of the political processes and legal concepts implicit in the American government. ELO5 Social Science - Innovation.

The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Emphasis is upon social, historical, and philosophical foundations of education; ethics; reflection; and professional development. Includes a series of observation and teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. Students must earn a grade of C or higher in this class for admittance into Teacher Education and to enroll in junior-level education classes. (Additional background check fee required.)

A robust series of well-sequenced early clinical field experiences that connect to and integrate the content of EDUC1400. Students will observe and participate in teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.

Acquire information pertaining to teacher education requirements and candidate responsibilities for the program assessment system. Take the GSOE entrance assessment, PRAXIS II preparation plan, among other requirements for program participation. Required for all transfer students during their first semester or term at Graceland. (Additional E-Portfolio fee required. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Development of skills and abilities related to learning physical education, health/wellness, visual and performance arts methods for teaching in the preschool and elementary classroom.

A two-week practicum in a middle school classroom. Prerequisites: EDUC3560. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis).

A pre-student teaching practicum of at least 100 clock hours. Work with three age levels: (1) infant and toddler, (2) preprimary, and (3) primary students in two different settings such as rural and urban, and encompassing differing socioeconomic status, ability levels, cultural and linguistic diversity and program types and sponsorship. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3310. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.

A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.

An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of inquiry-based teaching and learning of science. Curriculum and strategies introduced for instructing in the areas of physical, earth/space, and life science. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to science methods included. Prerequisite: EDUC1300, admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of teaching and learning mathematical processes to include problem solving, reasoning, communication, making connections and representations to the real life experiences for student learning. Curriculum, instruction, assessment, diagnosis and evaluation strategies introduced in the areas of numbers/operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, data analysis, and probability. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to math methods included. Prerequisites: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3540.

Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.

Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.

An introduction to the theories and practices connecting psychology and education. The course addresses the social contexts of child development (0-adult), classroom culture, learning, individual differences, social-emotional learning, and their implications related to physical, emotional, and cognitive development of children and the impact on learning. Measurement strategies are introduced and provide an understanding of classroom, local, state, and national assessments.  Prerequisite: EDUC1300

A required two-week internship for Elementary Education majors. Interns with endorsements in English/Language Arts, Health, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies have full-day placements in regular elementary classroom programs. Interns with endorsements in Art, Music and Physical Education have placements in these specialty-area classrooms. Elementary majors may substitute PHED3400. Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Designed for Elementary and Secondary Education teacher candidates with a focus on preparation for professional practice. The integrated study of professional ethics, legal frameworks, and pedagogical responsibilities in and out of the classroom. Emphasis on the assessment of students’ diverse needs and application of effective and culturally relevant instructional and classroom management strategies. An introduction to the Model Code of Ethics for Educators and the Iowa Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics frameworks and their role in professional decision-making.   Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Liberal Studies Program. Enroll during the semester that precedes student teaching.

The seminar is designed to promote a successful transition to student teaching and to provide a forum for peer support. Topics will center on discussions and assignments that merge education program coursework knowledge and teaching practice. The seminar is also designed to assist candidates as they apply for an initial Iowa teaching license and begin the job search. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of elementary student teaching in accordance with the policies in the Teacher Education Handbook. 

Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

* If a candidate with more than one teaching major completes 14 semester hours of student teaching for one major (or endorsements that require student teaching), an additional six semester hours of student teaching will meet the student teaching requirement for the asterisked second teaching major.

Candidates with majors in art, music, and physical education complete 14 weeks of student teaching in art, music, or physical education. Half (7 s.h.) of the experience is secondary level and half is elementary level. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.

This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

An introductory survey of selected world civilizations from the emergence of Western Europe as a center of world power. The impact of Western civilizations upon the development of other world civilizations and the contemporary emergence of a global perspective will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - World Citizenship, ELO5 Histories - Innovation.

A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.

Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.

The nature, philosophy, and history of the United States federal system with major consideration given to the national government, its organization, and the interrelation and functions of its component parts. A consideration of the political processes and legal concepts implicit in the American government. ELO5 Social Science - Innovation.

The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences

A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences

**Licensed teachers may meet student teaching requirement withEDUC3450 K-6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum– 2 s.h.>

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Study of the psychological, socio-cultural, and linguistic foundations of reading and writing processes and instruction. Apply knowledge of language development, reading acquisition (birth through third grade), and the variations related to culture and linguistic diversity to provide effective instruction in reading and writing. Acquire knowledge of the unique needs and backgrounds of students with language differences and delays and uses effective strategies for facilitating the learning of standard English by all learners.  A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.

A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.

Understand the general developmental, academic, social, career, and functional characteristics of individuals with mild and moderate disabilities. Examine educational alternatives and related services, including the role of the multidisciplinary team in studying etiologies of disabilities and providing appropriate educational programming. Prerequisites: EDUC1300. Co- or prerequisites: EDUC3580.

Learn to facilitate instructional methodologies for elementary-level learners with exceptional needs, including learning, behavioral, emotional, mental, and language disabilities in a mild/moderate setting. Prepare to plan individual educational programs and to implement curricula for the development of cognitive, academic, language, and functional life skills. Address remedial methods and techniques, including alternative methods for teaching skills and strategies, as well as appropriate assistive technology. One semester hour of this course is a supervised field experience. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3580.

Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.

A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Preparation in behavior management theories, methods, and techniques for K-12 students with mild/moderate learning, behavior, emotional, mental, and language disabilities. Address use of diagnostic instruments and non-aversive techniques for controlling targeted behaviors and attention deficits. Prepare to design, implement, and evaluate instructional programs that enhance an individual’s social participation in family, school, and community activities.

Use knowledge of assessment instruments, procedures, and practices for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies and needs, for planning and revising instruction for all students as well as those with reading difficulties. Examine policies and procedures related to special programs, including Title I. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC3300.

A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.

Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.

Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.

Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.

Examine legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of assessments and use of psychometric instruments. Review and discuss classroom assessments and instructional assessment measures for students with disabilities (infant through high school age). Study a variety of instruments, procedures, and practices that range from individual, group, formal, informal, and alternative assessments. Assessments utilized for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies/needs, planning and revising instruction, planning and placement decisions, and communicating results of ongoing assessment to all stakeholders. Prerequisite: EDUC1300.

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.

Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.

Study of the psychological, socio-cultural, and linguistic foundations of reading and writing processes and instruction. Apply knowledge of language development, reading acquisition (birth through third grade), and the variations related to culture and linguistic diversity to provide effective instruction in reading and writing. Acquire knowledge of the unique needs and backgrounds of students with language differences and delays and uses effective strategies for facilitating the learning of standard English by all learners.  A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.

A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.

Understand the general developmental, academic, social, career, and functional characteristics of individuals with mild and moderate disabilities. Examine educational alternatives and related services, including the role of the multidisciplinary team in studying etiologies of disabilities and providing appropriate educational programming. Prerequisites: EDUC1300. Co- or prerequisites: EDUC3580.

Learn to facilitate instructional methodologies for elementary-level learners with exceptional needs, including learning, behavioral, emotional, mental, and language disabilities in a mild/moderate setting. Prepare to plan individual educational programs and to implement curricula for the development of cognitive, academic, language, and functional life skills. Address remedial methods and techniques, including alternative methods for teaching skills and strategies, as well as appropriate assistive technology. One semester hour of this course is a supervised field experience. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3580.

Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.

A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

Preparation in behavior management theories, methods, and techniques for K-12 students with mild/moderate learning, behavior, emotional, mental, and language disabilities. Address use of diagnostic instruments and non-aversive techniques for controlling targeted behaviors and attention deficits. Prepare to design, implement, and evaluate instructional programs that enhance an individual’s social participation in family, school, and community activities.

Use knowledge of assessment instruments, procedures, and practices for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies and needs, for planning and revising instruction for all students as well as those with reading difficulties. Examine policies and procedures related to special programs, including Title I. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC3300.

A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.

Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.

Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.

Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.

Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.

Examine legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of assessments and use of psychometric instruments. Review and discuss classroom assessments and instructional assessment measures for students with disabilities (infant through high school age). Study a variety of instruments, procedures, and practices that range from individual, group, formal, informal, and alternative assessments. Assessments utilized for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies/needs, planning and revising instruction, planning and placement decisions, and communicating results of ongoing assessment to all stakeholders. Prerequisite: EDUC1300.

Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.

Transfer Admission Requirements:attended college full-time for at least two semesters and/or accumulated 24 semester hours or more of credit;cumulative GPA of 2.0 or higher on a 4-point scale:

The application process to the School of Education isseparatefrom the Graceland University acceptance process. Students will already be enrolled in Graceland coursework when they apply to the school of education.

In order to be accepted into the Teacher Education program, students must complete the following requirements.

When you have completed the acceptance requirements above, your name will automatically go before the Teacher Education Committee at their next regularly scheduled monthly meeting. The Teacher Education Committee will review your file and determine final acceptance into the Teacher Education Program. You will receive a letter informing you of your acceptance status.

Candidates seeking admission to Student Teaching are required to complete the following prior to March 1 of the year prior to when student teaching is to begin. Applicants must have:

### Teacher Licensure

At the close of their final semester, students normally apply to the state for licensure. Teaching certificates are then issued by Iowa to applicants who meet the necessary requirements. When planning to teach in a state other than Iowa, students will plan their programs in accordance with the requirements of the other state. They will in turn be recommended by the university for those certificates for which they qualify.

Additional costs may result if Student Teaching outside a 90 mile radius of either the Lamoni or Independence campus.Click here for more information regarding additional fees.

Questions?

Next Step

1 University Pl,Lamoni, IA 50140641.784.5000866.472.2352Campus Map

1401 W. Truman Road,Independence, MO  64050816.833.0524800.833.0524

We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.

You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.

This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognizing you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.

Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.

If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.

This website uses Google Analytics to collect anonymous information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages.

Keeping this cookie enabled helps us to improve our website.

Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!


## Additional List Items

- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- EVENING CLASSESgive our future educators the ability to continue working while they finish their coursework.
- OurCOHORT MODELdelivers opportunities for collaboration with a community of peers.
- Graceland’sSMALL CLASS SIZESprovide the opportunity to forge relationships with their nationally recognized instructors, fostering mentors for their success.
- Attend convenient classesTWO NIGHTS A WEEK.
- So,why Graceland?Because, Graceland provides students with tailored, flexible, accelerated, collaborative opportunities for our future elementary educators. We want to make the world a better place for our young students, and educators who come out of our elementary education program are well-equipped to do just that.
- BA Degree - Elementary Education (K-6 grade level)In addition to the general education requirements,majors in Elementary Education must complete the Education requirements and one approved concentration:Education Requirements:SCIE1200 Integrated Science with Lab– 4 s.h.Science elective 2-4 s.h.ENGL1100 Composition I: Introduction to Writing SkillsorHONR1010 Honors 101– 3 s.h.COMM1100 Foundations of Public SpeakingorHONR2010 Honors 201– 3 s.h.MATH1310 Mathematical Concepts– 3 s.h.*Mathematics elective (MATH1360 Statistics for Critical Thinkingrecommended) – 3 s.h.HIST1320 World Civilizations IIorHIST2420 U.S. History since 1877– 3 s.h.POLS1300 United States Governmentor an approved United States Government with civic literacy class – 3 s.h.EDUC1300 Introduction to Education– 3 s.h.ora School of Education approved Introduction to Education course andEDUC1410 Clinical Experience Lab– 1 s.h.EDUC2120 Human Relations– 3 s.h.EDUC2300 Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education– 3 s.h.EDUC2420 Teacher Education Entry Workshop– 0 s.h.EDUC3300 Foundations of Literacy Instruction– 3 s.h.EDUC3475 Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies– 3 s.h.EDUC3481 Language Arts, Reading, and Writing Methods– 3 s.h.EDUC3511 Science Methods for Elementary Educators– 3 s.h.EDUC3530 Math Methods for Elementary Educators– 3 s.h.EDUC3540 Elementary Education Methods Lab– 1 s.h.EDUC3580 Education of Exceptional Children and Adults– 3 s.h.EDUC3590 Educational Psychology and Measurement– 3 s.h.EDUC3710 K-6 Elementary Education Practicum(may be met by electingEDUC3280,EDUC3290,EDUC3330, orEDUC3450).Students with concentrations in Art, Music, or Physical Education must conduct the internship in the appropriate subject area – 1-2 s.h.EDUC4250 Professional Practice Seminar– 3 s.h.**EDUC4400 Elementary Student Teaching– 14 s.h.PSYC2250 Developmental Psychology– 3 s.h.EDUC2500 Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance Arts– 1-3 s.h.orMethods courses inElementary Physical EducationHealth/WellnessVisual ArtsPerformance Arts (Music or Creative Drama)EDUC4380 Capstone Seminar– 0 s.h.*A Computer Science course will not meet the mathematics elective.**Students with majors in Elementary Education and another teaching discipline who are seeking endorsements at both the elementary and secondary levels should substituteEDUC4450 Combination Student Teaching. Students with a concentration in K-8 Mild/Moderate Special Education should substituteEDUC4460 Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching.Courses OfferedCOMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.EDUC1300Introduction to EducationEDUC1300Introduction to Education  - 3 s.h.Emphasis is upon social, historical, and philosophical foundations of education; ethics; reflection; and professional development. Includes a series of observation and teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. Students must earn a grade of C or higher in this class for admittance into Teacher Education and to enroll in junior-level education classes. (Additional background check fee required.)EDUC1410Clinical Experience LabEDUC1410Clinical Experience Lab  - 1 s.h.A robust series of well-sequenced early clinical field experiences that connect to and integrate the content of EDUC1400. Students will observe and participate in teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC2120Human RelationsEDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.EDUC2420Teacher Education Entry WorkshopEDUC2420Teacher Education Entry Workshop  - 0.0 s.h.Acquire information pertaining to teacher education requirements and candidate responsibilities for the program assessment system. Take the GSOE entrance assessment, PRAXIS II preparation plan, among other requirements for program participation. Required for all transfer students during their first semester or term at Graceland. (Additional E-Portfolio fee required. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance ArtsEDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance Arts  - 1-3 s.h.Development of skills and abilities related to learning physical education, health/wellness, visual and performance arts methods for teaching in the preschool and elementary classroom.EDUC3280Middle School PracticumEDUC3280Middle School Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in a middle school classroom. Prerequisites: EDUC3560. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis).EDUC3290Early Childhood PracticumEDUC3290Early Childhood Practicum  - 1-2.5 s.h.A pre-student teaching practicum of at least 100 clock hours. Work with three age levels: (1) infant and toddler, (2) preprimary, and (3) primary students in two different settings such as rural and urban, and encompassing differing socioeconomic status, ability levels, cultural and linguistic diversity and program types and sponsorship. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3310. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.EDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.EDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of inquiry-based teaching and learning of science. Curriculum and strategies introduced for instructing in the areas of physical, earth/space, and life science. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to science methods included. Prerequisite: EDUC1300, admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of teaching and learning mathematical processes to include problem solving, reasoning, communication, making connections and representations to the real life experiences for student learning. Curriculum, instruction, assessment, diagnosis and evaluation strategies introduced in the areas of numbers/operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, data analysis, and probability. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to math methods included. Prerequisites: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3540.EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.EDUC3590Educational PsychologyEDUC3590Educational Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the theories and practices connecting psychology and education. The course addresses the social contexts of child development (0-adult), classroom culture, learning, individual differences, social-emotional learning, and their implications related to physical, emotional, and cognitive development of children and the impact on learning. Measurement strategies are introduced and provide an understanding of classroom, local, state, and national assessments.  Prerequisite: EDUC1300EDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education PracticumEDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A required two-week internship for Elementary Education majors. Interns with endorsements in English/Language Arts, Health, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies have full-day placements in regular elementary classroom programs. Interns with endorsements in Art, Music and Physical Education have placements in these specialty-area classrooms. Elementary majors may substitute PHED3400. Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4250Professional Practice SeminarEDUC4250Professional Practice Seminar  - 3 s.h.Designed for Elementary and Secondary Education teacher candidates with a focus on preparation for professional practice. The integrated study of professional ethics, legal frameworks, and pedagogical responsibilities in and out of the classroom. Emphasis on the assessment of students’ diverse needs and application of effective and culturally relevant instructional and classroom management strategies. An introduction to the Model Code of Ethics for Educators and the Iowa Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics frameworks and their role in professional decision-making.   Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Liberal Studies Program. Enroll during the semester that precedes student teaching.EDUC4380Capstone SeminarEDUC4380Capstone Seminar  - 0.0 s.h.The seminar is designed to promote a successful transition to student teaching and to provide a forum for peer support. Topics will center on discussions and assignments that merge education program coursework knowledge and teaching practice. The seminar is also designed to assist candidates as they apply for an initial Iowa teaching license and begin the job search. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)EDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of elementary student teaching in accordance with the policies in the Teacher Education Handbook. 

Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

* If a candidate with more than one teaching major completes 14 semester hours of student teaching for one major (or endorsements that require student teaching), an additional six semester hours of student teaching will meet the student teaching requirement for the asterisked second teaching major.EDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student TeachingEDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Candidates with majors in art, music, and physical education complete 14 weeks of student teaching in art, music, or physical education. Half (7 s.h.) of the experience is secondary level and half is elementary level. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HIST1320World Civilizations IIHIST1320World Civilizations II  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of selected world civilizations from the emergence of Western Europe as a center of world power. The impact of Western civilizations upon the development of other world civilizations and the contemporary emergence of a global perspective will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - World Citizenship, ELO5 Histories - Innovation.HIST2420United States History Since 1877HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HONR1010Honors 101HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HONR2010Honors 201HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.MATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.POLS1300United States GovernmentPOLS1300United States Government  - 3 s.h.The nature, philosophy, and history of the United States federal system with major consideration given to the national government, its organization, and the interrelation and functions of its component parts. A consideration of the political processes and legal concepts implicit in the American government. ELO5 Social Science - Innovation.PSYC2250Developmental PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesSCIE1200Integrated Science with LabSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural SciencesCOMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingEDUC1300Introduction to EducationEDUC1410Clinical Experience LabEDUC2120Human RelationsEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC2420Teacher Education Entry WorkshopEDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance ArtsEDUC3280Middle School PracticumEDUC3290Early Childhood PracticumEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3590Educational PsychologyEDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education PracticumEDUC4250Professional Practice SeminarEDUC4380Capstone SeminarEDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)EDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student TeachingEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingHIST1320World Civilizations IIHIST2420United States History Since 1877HONR1010Honors 101HONR2010Honors 201MATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingPOLS1300United States GovernmentPSYC2250Developmental PsychologySCIE1200Integrated Science with LabCourse DescriptionsCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.EDUC1300Introduction to Education  - 3 s.h.Emphasis is upon social, historical, and philosophical foundations of education; ethics; reflection; and professional development. Includes a series of observation and teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. Students must earn a grade of C or higher in this class for admittance into Teacher Education and to enroll in junior-level education classes. (Additional background check fee required.)EDUC1410Clinical Experience Lab  - 1 s.h.A robust series of well-sequenced early clinical field experiences that connect to and integrate the content of EDUC1400. Students will observe and participate in teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.EDUC2420Teacher Education Entry Workshop  - 0.0 s.h.Acquire information pertaining to teacher education requirements and candidate responsibilities for the program assessment system. Take the GSOE entrance assessment, PRAXIS II preparation plan, among other requirements for program participation. Required for all transfer students during their first semester or term at Graceland. (Additional E-Portfolio fee required. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance Arts  - 1-3 s.h.Development of skills and abilities related to learning physical education, health/wellness, visual and performance arts methods for teaching in the preschool and elementary classroom.EDUC3280Middle School Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in a middle school classroom. Prerequisites: EDUC3560. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis).EDUC3290Early Childhood Practicum  - 1-2.5 s.h.A pre-student teaching practicum of at least 100 clock hours. Work with three age levels: (1) infant and toddler, (2) preprimary, and (3) primary students in two different settings such as rural and urban, and encompassing differing socioeconomic status, ability levels, cultural and linguistic diversity and program types and sponsorship. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3310. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.EDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.EDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of inquiry-based teaching and learning of science. Curriculum and strategies introduced for instructing in the areas of physical, earth/space, and life science. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to science methods included. Prerequisite: EDUC1300, admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of teaching and learning mathematical processes to include problem solving, reasoning, communication, making connections and representations to the real life experiences for student learning. Curriculum, instruction, assessment, diagnosis and evaluation strategies introduced in the areas of numbers/operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, data analysis, and probability. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to math methods included. Prerequisites: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3540.EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.EDUC3590Educational Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the theories and practices connecting psychology and education. The course addresses the social contexts of child development (0-adult), classroom culture, learning, individual differences, social-emotional learning, and their implications related to physical, emotional, and cognitive development of children and the impact on learning. Measurement strategies are introduced and provide an understanding of classroom, local, state, and national assessments.  Prerequisite: EDUC1300EDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A required two-week internship for Elementary Education majors. Interns with endorsements in English/Language Arts, Health, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies have full-day placements in regular elementary classroom programs. Interns with endorsements in Art, Music and Physical Education have placements in these specialty-area classrooms. Elementary majors may substitute PHED3400. Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4250Professional Practice Seminar  - 3 s.h.Designed for Elementary and Secondary Education teacher candidates with a focus on preparation for professional practice. The integrated study of professional ethics, legal frameworks, and pedagogical responsibilities in and out of the classroom. Emphasis on the assessment of students’ diverse needs and application of effective and culturally relevant instructional and classroom management strategies. An introduction to the Model Code of Ethics for Educators and the Iowa Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics frameworks and their role in professional decision-making.   Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Liberal Studies Program. Enroll during the semester that precedes student teaching.EDUC4380Capstone Seminar  - 0.0 s.h.The seminar is designed to promote a successful transition to student teaching and to provide a forum for peer support. Topics will center on discussions and assignments that merge education program coursework knowledge and teaching practice. The seminar is also designed to assist candidates as they apply for an initial Iowa teaching license and begin the job search. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of elementary student teaching in accordance with the policies in the Teacher Education Handbook. 

Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

* If a candidate with more than one teaching major completes 14 semester hours of student teaching for one major (or endorsements that require student teaching), an additional six semester hours of student teaching will meet the student teaching requirement for the asterisked second teaching major.EDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Candidates with majors in art, music, and physical education complete 14 weeks of student teaching in art, music, or physical education. Half (7 s.h.) of the experience is secondary level and half is elementary level. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HIST1320World Civilizations II  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of selected world civilizations from the emergence of Western Europe as a center of world power. The impact of Western civilizations upon the development of other world civilizations and the contemporary emergence of a global perspective will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - World Citizenship, ELO5 Histories - Innovation.HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.MATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.MATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.POLS1300United States Government  - 3 s.h.The nature, philosophy, and history of the United States federal system with major consideration given to the national government, its organization, and the interrelation and functions of its component parts. A consideration of the political processes and legal concepts implicit in the American government. ELO5 Social Science - Innovation.PSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social SciencesSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- SCIE1200 Integrated Science with Lab– 4 s.h.
- Science elective 2-4 s.h.
- ENGL1100 Composition I: Introduction to Writing SkillsorHONR1010 Honors 101– 3 s.h.
- COMM1100 Foundations of Public SpeakingorHONR2010 Honors 201– 3 s.h.
- MATH1310 Mathematical Concepts– 3 s.h.
- *Mathematics elective (MATH1360 Statistics for Critical Thinkingrecommended) – 3 s.h.
- HIST1320 World Civilizations IIorHIST2420 U.S. History since 1877– 3 s.h.
- POLS1300 United States Governmentor an approved United States Government with civic literacy class – 3 s.h.
- EDUC1300 Introduction to Education– 3 s.h.ora School of Education approved Introduction to Education course andEDUC1410 Clinical Experience Lab– 1 s.h.
- EDUC2120 Human Relations– 3 s.h.
- EDUC2300 Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education– 3 s.h.
- EDUC2420 Teacher Education Entry Workshop– 0 s.h.
- EDUC3300 Foundations of Literacy Instruction– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3475 Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3481 Language Arts, Reading, and Writing Methods– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3511 Science Methods for Elementary Educators– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3530 Math Methods for Elementary Educators– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3540 Elementary Education Methods Lab– 1 s.h.
- EDUC3580 Education of Exceptional Children and Adults– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3590 Educational Psychology and Measurement– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3710 K-6 Elementary Education Practicum(may be met by electingEDUC3280,EDUC3290,EDUC3330, orEDUC3450).Students with concentrations in Art, Music, or Physical Education must conduct the internship in the appropriate subject area – 1-2 s.h.
- EDUC4250 Professional Practice Seminar– 3 s.h.
- **EDUC4400 Elementary Student Teaching– 14 s.h.
- PSYC2250 Developmental Psychology– 3 s.h.
- EDUC2500 Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance Arts– 1-3 s.h.orMethods courses inElementary Physical EducationHealth/WellnessVisual ArtsPerformance Arts (Music or Creative Drama)
- Elementary Physical Education
- Health/Wellness
- Visual Arts
- Performance Arts (Music or Creative Drama)
- EDUC4380 Capstone Seminar– 0 s.h.
- COMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- EDUC1300Introduction to EducationEDUC1300Introduction to Education  - 3 s.h.Emphasis is upon social, historical, and philosophical foundations of education; ethics; reflection; and professional development. Includes a series of observation and teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. Students must earn a grade of C or higher in this class for admittance into Teacher Education and to enroll in junior-level education classes. (Additional background check fee required.)
- EDUC1410Clinical Experience LabEDUC1410Clinical Experience Lab  - 1 s.h.A robust series of well-sequenced early clinical field experiences that connect to and integrate the content of EDUC1400. Students will observe and participate in teaching activities in a variety of P-12 classroom settings monitored by licensed professional educators as well as university faculty. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC2120Human RelationsEDUC2120Human Relations  - 3 s.h.Analysis of various societal subgroups and how such groups recognize and deal with dehumanizing biases.  Students learn to relate effectively to various groups to foster understanding and respect for equity, diversity, and inclusion. Emphasis on self-awareness in human relations issues and how this awareness can be translated into positive relationships. Introduction to ethnographic analysis and pedagogical, curricular, and social considerations involved in working with and educating various societal subgroups. ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality, ELO3 Ethical Thinking and Action - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences
- EDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.
- EDUC2420Teacher Education Entry WorkshopEDUC2420Teacher Education Entry Workshop  - 0.0 s.h.Acquire information pertaining to teacher education requirements and candidate responsibilities for the program assessment system. Take the GSOE entrance assessment, PRAXIS II preparation plan, among other requirements for program participation. Required for all transfer students during their first semester or term at Graceland. (Additional E-Portfolio fee required. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance ArtsEDUC2500Teaching PK/Elementary Physical Education, Health/Wellness, Visual and Performance Arts  - 1-3 s.h.Development of skills and abilities related to learning physical education, health/wellness, visual and performance arts methods for teaching in the preschool and elementary classroom.
- EDUC3280Middle School PracticumEDUC3280Middle School Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in a middle school classroom. Prerequisites: EDUC3560. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis).
- EDUC3290Early Childhood PracticumEDUC3290Early Childhood Practicum  - 1-2.5 s.h.A pre-student teaching practicum of at least 100 clock hours. Work with three age levels: (1) infant and toddler, (2) preprimary, and (3) primary students in two different settings such as rural and urban, and encompassing differing socioeconomic status, ability levels, cultural and linguistic diversity and program types and sponsorship. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3310. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.
- EDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.
- EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.
- EDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3511Science Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of inquiry-based teaching and learning of science. Curriculum and strategies introduced for instructing in the areas of physical, earth/space, and life science. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to science methods included. Prerequisite: EDUC1300, admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.
- EDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary EducatorsEDUC3530Math Methods for Elementary Educators  - 3 s.h.An introduction to best-practice, research-based methods of teaching and learning mathematical processes to include problem solving, reasoning, communication, making connections and representations to the real life experiences for student learning. Curriculum, instruction, assessment, diagnosis and evaluation strategies introduced in the areas of numbers/operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, data analysis, and probability. Integration of content reading strategies, technology and classroom management as it applies to math methods included. Prerequisites: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3540.
- EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.
- EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.
- EDUC3590Educational PsychologyEDUC3590Educational Psychology  - 3 s.h.An introduction to the theories and practices connecting psychology and education. The course addresses the social contexts of child development (0-adult), classroom culture, learning, individual differences, social-emotional learning, and their implications related to physical, emotional, and cognitive development of children and the impact on learning. Measurement strategies are introduced and provide an understanding of classroom, local, state, and national assessments.  Prerequisite: EDUC1300
- EDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education PracticumEDUC3710K-6 Elementary Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A required two-week internship for Elementary Education majors. Interns with endorsements in English/Language Arts, Health, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies have full-day placements in regular elementary classroom programs. Interns with endorsements in Art, Music and Physical Education have placements in these specialty-area classrooms. Elementary majors may substitute PHED3400. Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC4250Professional Practice SeminarEDUC4250Professional Practice Seminar  - 3 s.h.Designed for Elementary and Secondary Education teacher candidates with a focus on preparation for professional practice. The integrated study of professional ethics, legal frameworks, and pedagogical responsibilities in and out of the classroom. Emphasis on the assessment of students’ diverse needs and application of effective and culturally relevant instructional and classroom management strategies. An introduction to the Model Code of Ethics for Educators and the Iowa Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics frameworks and their role in professional decision-making.   Prerequisites: admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Liberal Studies Program. Enroll during the semester that precedes student teaching.
- EDUC4380Capstone SeminarEDUC4380Capstone Seminar  - 0.0 s.h.The seminar is designed to promote a successful transition to student teaching and to provide a forum for peer support. Topics will center on discussions and assignments that merge education program coursework knowledge and teaching practice. The seminar is also designed to assist candidates as they apply for an initial Iowa teaching license and begin the job search. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)EDUC4400Elementary Student Teaching (K-6)  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of elementary student teaching in accordance with the policies in the Teacher Education Handbook. 

Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)

* If a candidate with more than one teaching major completes 14 semester hours of student teaching for one major (or endorsements that require student teaching), an additional six semester hours of student teaching will meet the student teaching requirement for the asterisked second teaching major.
- EDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student TeachingEDUC4450Combination K-6 and 7-12 Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Candidates with majors in art, music, and physical education complete 14 weeks of student teaching in art, music, or physical education. Half (7 s.h.) of the experience is secondary level and half is elementary level. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.
- ENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to WritingENGL1100Composition I: Introduction to Writing  - 3 s.h.This is a writing-intensive course preparing students to become stronger, more confident writers as they develop their writing process habits and their ability to think critically about arguments around them. Students can expect to produce, deliver, and analyze college-level, written texts in addition to learning about grammar-use in context with an emphasis on meaning within the editing process. In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. In order to move on to COMM1100, students must earn the grade of a "C" or higher. ELO1A Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- HIST1320World Civilizations IIHIST1320World Civilizations II  - 3 s.h.An introductory survey of selected world civilizations from the emergence of Western Europe as a center of world power. The impact of Western civilizations upon the development of other world civilizations and the contemporary emergence of a global perspective will be stressed. ELO5 Histories - World Citizenship, ELO5 Histories - Innovation.
- HIST2420United States History Since 1877HIST2420United States History Since 1877  - 3 s.h.A survey of the personalities, events, and ideas that have shaped United States history since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Emphasis upon the rise of the industrial United States, 20th century adjustments to prosperity, depression and world war, and the political, social, and economic changes since World War II. ELO5 Histories - Innovation, GE3B Liberal Learning-Histories.
- HONR1010Honors 101HONR1010Honors 101  - 3 s.h.Interdisciplinary first-year seminar provides a common intellectual experience for new Honors students and introduces them to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Designed to help exceptional students produce, deliver, and, analyze written and oral texts and learn how written and oral performances function together in specific discourse communities. Substitutes for Discourse I. Admission by selection only. ELO1A Communication, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- HONR2010Honors 201HONR2010Honors 201  - 3 s.h.The second of two sequenced interdisciplinary Honors seminars focused on developing the skills of written and oral communication, critical inquiry, and research. Students produce, deliver, and analyze college-level written and oral texts based on sustained academic research, and continue to develop their understanding of critical discourse analysis and critical language awareness in the context of a range of discursive forms (written, oral, visual and/or multimedia). Reinforces the common intellectual experience of the Honors program and further exposes students to the culture and opportunities of a small liberal arts institution. Admission by selection only. Substitutes for Discourse II. Prerequisite: HONR1010. ELO1B Communication, GE1A Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- MATH1310Mathematical ConceptsMATH1310Mathematical Concepts  - 3 s.h.A systematic development of whole number systems, geometry, set theory, counting, measurement, and algebra.. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- MATH1360Statistics for Critical ThinkingMATH1360Statistics for Critical Thinking  - 3 s.h.A critical thinking approach to data analysis, measures of central tendency, dispersion, correlation, probability, estimation and hypothesis testing. ELO6 Math, GE2B Foundational Skills-Mathematics/Quantitative.
- POLS1300United States GovernmentPOLS1300United States Government  - 3 s.h.The nature, philosophy, and history of the United States federal system with major consideration given to the national government, its organization, and the interrelation and functions of its component parts. A consideration of the political processes and legal concepts implicit in the American government. ELO5 Social Science - Innovation.
- PSYC2250Developmental PsychologyPSYC2250Developmental Psychology  - 3 s.h.The study of human development over the entire lifespan. Focus is on the interaction of physical, intellectual, social, and emotional aspects of development. ELO5 Social Science - Equality, ELO5 Social Science - Equality and Peace, GE3E Liberal Learning-Social Sciences
- SCIE1200Integrated Science with LabSCIE1200Integrated Science with Lab  - 4 s.h.A broad overview of concepts from earth and space science (e.g., physical and historical geology, structure and processes of the hydrosphere, and astronomy), life sciences (e.g., structure and function of cells, levels of organization, genetics, evolution, classification and characteristics of the major groups of organisms, structures and functions of plant organs and systems, anatomy and physiology of animals (including human body systems), and ecology), and physical sciences (e.g., structure and properties of matter, relationships between energy and matter, chemical reactions, mechanics, electricity, magnetism, waves, and optics). Not intended for science majors. Additional fee required. Fulfills liberal learning science course. GE3D Liberal Learning-Natural Sciences
- ConcentrationsConcentrations**K-8 Mild and Moderate Special Education:EDUC3200 Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12– 3 s.h.EDUC3220 K-8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Learners– 3 s.h.EDUC3350 Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate Disabilities– 3 s.h.EDUC3390 Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities– 3 s.h.EDUC3450 K-6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum– 2 s.h.EDUC3470 Collaborative Consultation– 3 s.h.EDUC3630 Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation Strategies– 3 s.h.EDUC4230 Classroom Management– 3 s.h.EDUC3580 Education of Exceptional Children and Adults– 3 s.h.EDUC4460 Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching– 14 s.h.**Licensed teachers may meet student teaching requirement withEDUC3450 K-6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum– 2 s.h.>Reading (K-8)EDUC2150 Literacy Instruction for Early Reading and Language Acquisition– 3 s.h.EDUC2300 Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education– 3 s.h.EDUC3300 Foundations of Literacy Instruction– 3 s.h.EDUC3330 K-6 Reading Practicum– 2-3 s.h.EDUC3390 Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities– 3 s.h.EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies– 3 s.h.EDUC3481 Language Arts, Reading, and Writing Methods– 3 s.h.EDUC3630 Assessment, Diagnosis and Evaluation Strategies– 3 s.h.EDUC3540 Methods Lab– 1 s.h.Courses OfferedCOMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.EDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and CollaborationEDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and Collaboration  - 3 s.h.Study of the psychological, socio-cultural, and linguistic foundations of reading and writing processes and instruction. Apply knowledge of language development, reading acquisition (birth through third grade), and the variations related to culture and linguistic diversity to provide effective instruction in reading and writing. Acquire knowledge of the unique needs and backgrounds of students with language differences and delays and uses effective strategies for facilitating the learning of standard English by all learners.  A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.EDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.EDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12EDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12  - 3 s.h.Understand the general developmental, academic, social, career, and functional characteristics of individuals with mild and moderate disabilities. Examine educational alternatives and related services, including the role of the multidisciplinary team in studying etiologies of disabilities and providing appropriate educational programming. Prerequisites: EDUC1300. Co- or prerequisites: EDUC3580.EDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special EducationEDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special Education  - 3 s.h.Learn to facilitate instructional methodologies for elementary-level learners with exceptional needs, including learning, behavioral, emotional, mental, and language disabilities in a mild/moderate setting. Prepare to plan individual educational programs and to implement curricula for the development of cognitive, academic, language, and functional life skills. Address remedial methods and techniques, including alternative methods for teaching skills and strategies, as well as appropriate assistive technology. One semester hour of this course is a supervised field experience. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3580.EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.EDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate DisabilitiesEDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Preparation in behavior management theories, methods, and techniques for K-12 students with mild/moderate learning, behavior, emotional, mental, and language disabilities. Address use of diagnostic instruments and non-aversive techniques for controlling targeted behaviors and attention deficits. Prepare to design, implement, and evaluate instructional programs that enhance an individual’s social participation in family, school, and community activities.EDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading DisabilitiesEDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Use knowledge of assessment instruments, procedures, and practices for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies and needs, for planning and revising instruction for all students as well as those with reading difficulties. Examine policies and procedures related to special programs, including Title I. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC3300.EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3470Collaborative ConsultationEDUC3470Collaborative Consultation  - 3 s.h.A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.EDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and EvaluationEDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation  - 3 s.h.Examine legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of assessments and use of psychometric instruments. Review and discuss classroom assessments and instructional assessment measures for students with disabilities (infant through high school age). Study a variety of instruments, procedures, and practices that range from individual, group, formal, informal, and alternative assessments. Assessments utilized for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies/needs, planning and revising instruction, planning and placement decisions, and communicating results of ongoing assessment to all stakeholders. Prerequisite: EDUC1300.EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.COMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingEDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and CollaborationEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12EDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special EducationEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate DisabilitiesEDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading DisabilitiesEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3470Collaborative ConsultationEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and EvaluationEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingCourse DescriptionsCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.EDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and Collaboration  - 3 s.h.Study of the psychological, socio-cultural, and linguistic foundations of reading and writing processes and instruction. Apply knowledge of language development, reading acquisition (birth through third grade), and the variations related to culture and linguistic diversity to provide effective instruction in reading and writing. Acquire knowledge of the unique needs and backgrounds of students with language differences and delays and uses effective strategies for facilitating the learning of standard English by all learners.  A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.EDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.EDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12  - 3 s.h.Understand the general developmental, academic, social, career, and functional characteristics of individuals with mild and moderate disabilities. Examine educational alternatives and related services, including the role of the multidisciplinary team in studying etiologies of disabilities and providing appropriate educational programming. Prerequisites: EDUC1300. Co- or prerequisites: EDUC3580.EDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special Education  - 3 s.h.Learn to facilitate instructional methodologies for elementary-level learners with exceptional needs, including learning, behavioral, emotional, mental, and language disabilities in a mild/moderate setting. Prepare to plan individual educational programs and to implement curricula for the development of cognitive, academic, language, and functional life skills. Address remedial methods and techniques, including alternative methods for teaching skills and strategies, as well as appropriate assistive technology. One semester hour of this course is a supervised field experience. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3580.EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.EDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Preparation in behavior management theories, methods, and techniques for K-12 students with mild/moderate learning, behavior, emotional, mental, and language disabilities. Address use of diagnostic instruments and non-aversive techniques for controlling targeted behaviors and attention deficits. Prepare to design, implement, and evaluate instructional programs that enhance an individual’s social participation in family, school, and community activities.EDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Use knowledge of assessment instruments, procedures, and practices for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies and needs, for planning and revising instruction for all students as well as those with reading difficulties. Examine policies and procedures related to special programs, including Title I. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC3300.EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)EDUC3470Collaborative Consultation  - 3 s.h.A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.EDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation  - 3 s.h.Examine legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of assessments and use of psychometric instruments. Review and discuss classroom assessments and instructional assessment measures for students with disabilities (infant through high school age). Study a variety of instruments, procedures, and practices that range from individual, group, formal, informal, and alternative assessments. Assessments utilized for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies/needs, planning and revising instruction, planning and placement decisions, and communicating results of ongoing assessment to all stakeholders. Prerequisite: EDUC1300.EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.
- EDUC3200 Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3220 K-8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Learners– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3350 Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate Disabilities– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3390 Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3450 K-6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum– 2 s.h.
- EDUC3470 Collaborative Consultation– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3630 Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation Strategies– 3 s.h.
- EDUC4230 Classroom Management– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3580 Education of Exceptional Children and Adults– 3 s.h.
- EDUC4460 Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching– 14 s.h.
- EDUC2150 Literacy Instruction for Early Reading and Language Acquisition– 3 s.h.
- EDUC2300 Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3300 Foundations of Literacy Instruction– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3330 K-6 Reading Practicum– 2-3 s.h.
- EDUC3390 Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3481 Language Arts, Reading, and Writing Methods– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3630 Assessment, Diagnosis and Evaluation Strategies– 3 s.h.
- EDUC3540 Methods Lab– 1 s.h.
- COMM1100Foundations of Public SpeakingCOMM1100Foundations of Public Speaking  - 3 s.h.Foundations of Public Speaking focuses on practices in the speech processes of writing, delivery, listening, audience analysis, criticism, and performance of introductory, informative, persuasive, and mediated speeches. The course introduces foundations of academic research and provides students with the skillset to expand their critical thinking and speaking to meet the dynamic demands of public communication. The emphasis of the course is on learning through performance and application of communication principles and tools.  In order for students to complete the foundation skills sequence, they must earn a grade of C or higher in this class. Prerequisite C or better in ENGL1100 or HONR1010. ELO1B Communications, GE1B Foundational Skills-Writing and Communication.
- EDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and CollaborationEDUC2160Early Literacy, Language Acquisition, and Collaboration  - 3 s.h.Study of the psychological, socio-cultural, and linguistic foundations of reading and writing processes and instruction. Apply knowledge of language development, reading acquisition (birth through third grade), and the variations related to culture and linguistic diversity to provide effective instruction in reading and writing. Acquire knowledge of the unique needs and backgrounds of students with language differences and delays and uses effective strategies for facilitating the learning of standard English by all learners.  A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.
- EDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary EducationEDUC2300Children’s and Adolescent Literature in Elementary Education  - 3 s.h.A survey of literature for children. Prepare to use knowledge of children’s literature for modeling the reading and writing of varied genres, fiction and nonfiction, technology- and media-based information, and non-print materials; for motivating through the use of texts at multiple levels, representing broad interests, and reflecting varied cultures, linguistic backgrounds, and perspectives; and for matching text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Includes a brief survey of literature for the adolescent. Does not apply toward literature for general education.
- EDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12EDUC3200Introduction to Mild/Moderate Disabilities K-12  - 3 s.h.Understand the general developmental, academic, social, career, and functional characteristics of individuals with mild and moderate disabilities. Examine educational alternatives and related services, including the role of the multidisciplinary team in studying etiologies of disabilities and providing appropriate educational programming. Prerequisites: EDUC1300. Co- or prerequisites: EDUC3580.
- EDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special EducationEDUC3220K–8 Methods and Strategies for Mild/Moderate Special Education  - 3 s.h.Learn to facilitate instructional methodologies for elementary-level learners with exceptional needs, including learning, behavioral, emotional, mental, and language disabilities in a mild/moderate setting. Prepare to plan individual educational programs and to implement curricula for the development of cognitive, academic, language, and functional life skills. Address remedial methods and techniques, including alternative methods for teaching skills and strategies, as well as appropriate assistive technology. One semester hour of this course is a supervised field experience. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3580.
- EDUC3300Foundations of Literacy InstructionEDUC3300Foundations of Literacy Instruction  - 3 s.h.Study a range of research pertaining to reading, writing, and learning, including scientifically-based reading research, and knowledge of histories of reading. Examine major components of reading. Use a variety of assessment strategies to identify reading proficiencies and evaluating needs for planning and instruction and communicating results of assessments. Match text complexities to the proficiencies and needs of readers. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction across the curriculum, for grouping students, and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisite EDUC1300.
- EDUC3330K-6 Reading PracticumEDUC3330K-6 Reading Practicum  - 1-3 s.h.A three-week practicum in elementary school literacy programs for struggling students. Work with a licensed professional who observes, evaluates, and provides feedback on knowledge, dispositions, and performance of the teaching of reading and writing. Effectively use reading and writing strategies, materials, and assessments based upon appropriate reading and writing research and work with colleagues and families in the support of reading and writing development. Pre or Corequisite: EDUC3390. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate DisabilitiesEDUC3350Behavior Management for Mild/Moderate Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Preparation in behavior management theories, methods, and techniques for K-12 students with mild/moderate learning, behavior, emotional, mental, and language disabilities. Address use of diagnostic instruments and non-aversive techniques for controlling targeted behaviors and attention deficits. Prepare to design, implement, and evaluate instructional programs that enhance an individual’s social participation in family, school, and community activities.
- EDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading DisabilitiesEDUC3390Analysis and Correction of Reading Disabilities  - 3 s.h.Use knowledge of assessment instruments, procedures, and practices for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies and needs, for planning and revising instruction for all students as well as those with reading difficulties. Examine policies and procedures related to special programs, including Title I. Use knowledge of a range of research-based strategies and instructional technology for designing and delivering effective instruction and for selecting materials appropriate for learners at various stages of reading and writing development and from varied cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC3300.
- EDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education PracticumEDUC3450K–6 Mild/Moderate Special Education Practicum  - 1-2 s.h.A two-week practicum in Mild/Moderate Special Education Programs in elementary schools. Prerequisites: EDUC3200, EDUC3220. Admittance into Teacher Education required. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.)
- EDUC3470Collaborative ConsultationEDUC3470Collaborative Consultation  - 3 s.h.A study of methods and strategies for working with parents, support services personnel, regular classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and other individuals involved in an education setting.
- EDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading StrategiesEDUC3475Social Studies Methods and Content Reading Strategies  - 3 s.h.Best-practice, research-based instructional methods for teaching social studies in an elementary classroom including citizenship, history, geography, civic literacy, and economics. Strategies for integrating content reading strategies, technology and classroom management with social studies are incorporated. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program.
- EDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and WritingEDUC3481Language Arts, Reading, and Writing  - 3 s.h.Curriculum and strategies for instructing language arts, reading, and writing in the elementary school. Use knowledge and assessment of reading-writing-speaking connections, listening and viewing, the writing process, the stages of spelling development, writing genres and the connections between oral and written language development to effectively teach writing as communication and integrating within the content areas. Technology and classroom management as it applies to literacy methods is included. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program and EDUC3300.
- EDUC3540Elementary Education Methods LabEDUC3540Elementary Education Methods Lab  - 1 s.h.Students apply curriculum planning and instructional strategies for teaching literacy and mathematics in a pre-student teaching clinical experience. Students are placed in two different grade levels to include one primary and one intermediate placement. Prerequisite: Admittance into Teacher Education, unless part of an approved Interdisciplinary Studies Program. Co-requisite: EDUC3530.
- EDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and AdultEDUC3580Education of Exceptional Child and Adult  - 3 s.h.Examine the philosophical, historical and legal bases for special education, including the definitions and etiologies of individuals with disabilities and exceptional learning needs. Study gifted individuals and those with exceptional needs from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Prerequisites: EDUC1300.
- EDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and EvaluationEDUC3630Assessment, Diagnosis, and Evaluation  - 3 s.h.Examine legal provisions, regulations and guidelines of assessments and use of psychometric instruments. Review and discuss classroom assessments and instructional assessment measures for students with disabilities (infant through high school age). Study a variety of instruments, procedures, and practices that range from individual, group, formal, informal, and alternative assessments. Assessments utilized for the identification of students’ reading proficiencies/needs, planning and revising instruction, planning and placement decisions, and communicating results of ongoing assessment to all stakeholders. Prerequisite: EDUC1300.
- EDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student TeachingEDUC4460Elementary and Mild/Moderate Student Teaching  - 6-14 s.h.Elementary Education Majors complete 14 weeks of student teaching. Will include a mild/moderate special education setting and a mainstream elementary classroom. This course substitutes for EDUC4400. Additional fee required. Prerequisites: Senior standing, admittance into Teacher Education, and approval for student teaching. (Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.) 

** This is the only student teaching course required for elementary majors completing the K-12 Mild/Moderate Special Education endorsement.
- attended college full-time for at least two semesters and/or accumulated 24 semester hours or more of credit;
- cumulative GPA of 2.0 or higher on a 4-point scale:
- Apply for admission to the Teacher Education program
- Have a minimum 2.75 grade point average (GPA)
- Submit three professional/faculty references (two from Graceland School of Education faculty)
- Final grade in EDUC1400 (“C” or above)
- “Pass” grade for EDUC1410 Clinical Lab for EDUC1400
- “Pass” grade for EDUC2420 Entry Workshop
- Complete a graduation plan
- Been admitted to the Teacher Education Program,
- Completed required Education courses with e-portfolio assessed,
- Maintained a 2.75 cumulative GPA,
- Earned a “C” or higher grade in all required Education classes,
- Completed a successful practicum or internship,
- Removed incomplete grades in required Education courses or other courses. If completion of an incomplete grade is pending, submit a plan for completion before participation in student teaching.
- Privacy Overview
- Strictly Necessary Cookies
- 3rd Party Cookies
