# Hybrid DPT Programs: Doctor of Physical Therapy Degree

Source URL: https://www.graceland.edu/programs/doctor-of-physical-therapy#top

Receive your Doctor of Physical Therapy Degree with Graceland’s flexible hybrid learning experience.

The Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) at Graceland University is a hybrid, accelerated physical therapy program that provides students with an innovative and collaborative learning community. The mission of the program is to develop movement system experts who lead and serve their communities with justice, compassion, excellence, and a sense of belonging through a thorough, advanced doctor of physical therapy degree. The innovative, two-year hybrid DPT program curriculum develops an adaptable, collaborative, evidence-informed, socially responsible, and reflective learning community of practitioners. Students will graduate as empowered physical therapists who can provide transformational care and leadership that serves and positively impacts society.Priority Application Deadline:June 2, 2025Program start:Onsite Orientation: December 2025, classes begin: January 2026Lab Immersions held in Mission, Kansas just outside of Kansas City, MO

The Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) at Graceland University is a hybrid, accelerated physical therapy program that provides students with an innovative and collaborative learning community. The mission of the program is to develop movement system experts who lead and serve their communities with justice, compassion, excellence, and a sense of belonging through a thorough, advanced doctor of physical therapy degree. The innovative, two-year hybrid DPT program curriculum develops an adaptable, collaborative, evidence-informed, socially responsible, and reflective learning community of practitioners. Students will graduate as empowered physical therapists who can provide transformational care and leadership that serves and positively impacts society.

Priority Application Deadline:June 2, 2025Program start:Onsite Orientation: December 2025, classes begin: January 2026Lab Immersions held in Mission, Kansas just outside of Kansas City, MO

The degree requirements consist of a core set of courses in foundational and clinical sciences, evidence-based practice, and specialty areas (i.e. geriatrics, pediatrics, etc.). Students can expect to complete physical therapy clinical practice hours within the field under the supervision of a licensed physical therapist.Find more information on how clinical education experiences work.The hybrid format of instruction is provided through online education and face-to-face onsite lab immersion sessions that allow students to live anywhere in the country. The program is designed to be in full compliance with the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapist Education (CAPTE).While you’re a DPT student at Graceland, learning is expected to be your full-time job. You can anticipate to attend classes online and complete coursework during the day, and you’ll need to find time in your schedule to study. Some students may chose to work part-time during the program, but we recommend waiting until after the first trimester and fully committing yourself to this innovative and fast learning experienceLab immersions are full-time (8-5 p.m.) 7 days a week for up to 2 weeks in duration. During the first year, there are 6 lab immersion sessions held in the Kansas City area (Mission, Kansas). During the second year, there is 1 lab immersion (June) and 3 full-time clinical education rotations that require full-time work according to your assigned site’s schedule. Please see the Academic Calendar for the cohort you are interested in for more detailed information including dates for all sessions. All distance learning classes will be scheduled based on Central Standard Time and will occur between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. CST, Monday through Friday.

The degree requirements consist of a core set of courses in foundational and clinical sciences, evidence-based practice, and specialty areas (i.e. geriatrics, pediatrics, etc.). Students can expect to complete physical therapy clinical practice hours within the field under the supervision of a licensed physical therapist.Find more information on how clinical education experiences work.

The hybrid format of instruction is provided through online education and face-to-face onsite lab immersion sessions that allow students to live anywhere in the country. The program is designed to be in full compliance with the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapist Education (CAPTE).

While you’re a DPT student at Graceland, learning is expected to be your full-time job. You can anticipate to attend classes online and complete coursework during the day, and you’ll need to find time in your schedule to study. Some students may chose to work part-time during the program, but we recommend waiting until after the first trimester and fully committing yourself to this innovative and fast learning experience

Lab immersions are full-time (8-5 p.m.) 7 days a week for up to 2 weeks in duration. During the first year, there are 6 lab immersion sessions held in the Kansas City area (Mission, Kansas). During the second year, there is 1 lab immersion (June) and 3 full-time clinical education rotations that require full-time work according to your assigned site’s schedule. Please see the Academic Calendar for the cohort you are interested in for more detailed information including dates for all sessions. All distance learning classes will be scheduled based on Central Standard Time and will occur between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. CST, Monday through Friday.

This course introduces foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the trunk and lower quarter. Explores the clinical application of genetics, embryology, histology, and basic joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for tissue differential identification. This course addresses the content of the anatomical regions, including the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower extremities. Emphasis is on neuromuscular and musculoskeletal anatomy. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program.

This continues to develop foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the cervicothoracic spine and upper quarter. Explores the clinical application of joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for differential tissue identification. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course explores the physiology and pathophysiology of the cellular, integumentary, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and immune systems. Studies medical physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course introduces pharmacologic principles and studies medications used in the management of common patient conditions encountered during physical therapy care, and their influence on patient management across the lifespan. The impact of medications on patient presentations, timing of rehabilitation sessions, and physical therapy outcomes are emphasized. Content includes common medications for the cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, urogenital, rheumatologic, psychosocial, and integumentary systems. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course offers a framework for understanding normal and abnormal movement by introducing the fundamentals of movement science focused on the areas of kinesiology, neuroscience, physiology, motor control, and motor learning. Integrating theory with basic principles of motor behavior and motor development will be applied to human motor performance and gait across the lifespan. Emphasis is on the integration of theory, structured movement analyses of activities performed in daily life, and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model to inform clinical decision making in physical therapist practice. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course explores the neuroscience of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, neurophysiological functions and developmental sequence of the motor and sensory systems that regulate movement. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course deepens neuroscience understanding of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, pathways and neurophysiological functions that regulate the senses, reflexes posture and the viscera. Lab activities emphasize elements of the neurologic examination and an introduction to common outcome measures and assessment tools. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course prepares the student for patient care activities including patient-centered communication, use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework and introduction to its use in various clinical settings. Students will begin to develop patient interview and documentation skills, perform examination tests and measures, and use standardized patient outcome measures. Use of the International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) model for critical thinking and data categorization is introduced. Psychomotor skills that are foundational to examination and evaluation are introduced, including vital signs, body mechanics awareness, patient positioning and draping, transfers, assistive device training, basic exercise instruction goniometry, range of motion, muscle testing, and anthropometric measures. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course introduces and integrates biomechanical principles of joint structure and function, movement analysis, and tissue healing and response to stress. Application of these principles is used to develop basic intervention prescription for the management of patients with acute pain and mobility impairments across the lifespan, with a focus on therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and selected physical agents. Patient cases are presented to build a framework for identifying tissue specific intervention needs based on identified impairment(s) and activity/participation limitations. Integrates current evidence and clinical decision-making to emphasize appropriate selection, instruction, and progression of interventions. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Progra

This course further develops the principles and application of selected physical-agents and therapeutic interventions for the management of patients with pain and tissue injury while addressing impairments related to mobility, strength, and motor control deficits across the lifespan. Integrates tissue healing principles, current evidence, and case presentation into the clinical decision-making framework to appropriately select, instruct, and progress interventions. Concepts for developing therapeutic alliance and empathy are introduced. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course introduces preventive health, wellness, and fitness concepts as they relate to injury prevention, nutritional influences, social determinants of health, fitness testing, and exercise prescription in a healthy population. Students develop injury prevention and exercise programs based on examination results and deliver these to the client using proper procedures and patient-centered communication. Through live or virtual cases, students will learn to modify programs to meet the needs of those with various health literacy and health center access. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course introduces the foundation of general research and evidence-based principles by exploring research methodologies and outcome measures used in health care. Introduces foundational concepts of scientific inquiry for clinicians by creating clinical questions, searching appropriate literature sources, and assessing the evidence quality. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course expands elements of applied research design and statistics that foster students to become intelligent consumers of scientific literature. Items related to measurement, research design, statistical analysis, critical inquiry, and strength of evidence are presented. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

The course defines professional conduct and teaches professional formation and application of lifelong learning skills necessary for developing towards a physical therapy practitioner. Throughout this course, students explore the ethics, core values, and roles and responsibilities of the physical therapist, and the importance of optimizing communication with respect to others' individual and cultural differences, and abilities. Creating an initial professional and lifelong learning skills development plan prepares the student for the professional physical therapy curriculum. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

The second course in this series prepares students professionally and emotionally for physical therapy clinical practice through exploring roles as a lifelong learner, patient advocate, clinical educator, and a member of the interprofessional care team. Students investigate major health care payer models, billing and coding practice, patient care optimization, and health care regulations, and their impact on physical therapy services. This course blends topics through case applications focused on communication, cultural safety, professional behavior and abilities, ethics, legal issues, safety, and risk management perspectives across all practice settings. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course advances use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop strategies for systems differential identification, neuromuscular differential diagnosis and for interprofessional collaboration when needed. This course introduces examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing for select conditions of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and hip regions and develops critical reasoning through use of clinical cases. This course emphasizes application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions targeting patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course continues to develop students' use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework in the examination, evaluation, and treatment sequence of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the lower quarter. Focus is placed on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. This course builds on culturally competent, patient centered care through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

The third course in this series continues use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the head and cervicothoracic region. Concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient centered care and use of sound critical reasoning strategies is developed through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This The final course in this series continues to integrate critical reasoning for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and management of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for musculoskeletal dysfunction of the upper extremities. This course concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient-centered care is advanced through clinical presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course introduces examination and management of movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from central nervous system pathology, with emphasis on traumatic and acquired brain injury, concussion management, and vestibular conditions. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to build on the student’s critical reasoning strategies is integrated through use of clinical cases. Lab experiences develop patient-centered management skills and recovery-based treatment techniques built on neuroplasticity principles for patients with neurologic dysfunction. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course advances examination, evaluation and management of specific movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from nervous system pathology. Emphasis is on spinal cord injury, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and other acquired, genetic, and degenerative nervous system disorders common to physical therapist practice. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework through clinical cases is used to strengthen students critical reasoning for developing comprehensive, patient-centered care plans for patients across the continuum of clinical practice settings. Lab experiences continue integration of critical reasoning for selection, performance and adaptation of examination and interventions skills for treatment and management of patients with neurologic diseases/conditions. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses.

This course builds on the use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop evaluation, examination, and management skills for patients with common cardiovascular, metabolic, and pulmonary causes of movement system dysfunction. Lab activities include, but are not limited to, ECG analysis, exercise testing, heart and lung auscultation, lung function testing, and chest examinations. Case discussions are presented to enhance communication, safety, patient management, application of evidence for practice, and discharge planning skills across a variety of clinical settings. Students develop appropriate observation and clinical skills necessary for completing a comprehensive evaluation and formulating a comprehensive plan of care with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course provides a foundation for physical therapist evaluation and management of integumentary health and decision-making related wounds and vascular diseases that impacts patients/clients across the lifespan. Communication and collaboration with the interprofessional care team to manage patients with integumentary impairments, wounds, and limb amputations is a focus in this course. Combining understanding of lifestyle, psychosocial and social determinants (drivers) of health from prior courses is advanced through direct instruction and case application. Specific principles for management of patients with limb differences and prosthetic needs, including early post-operative management, prosthetic materials, design, fabrication, and technology, and ongoing physical therapy interventions to optimize functional performance is a focus of this course. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course provides an overview of basic business principles, as they relate to the practice of physical therapy with a systems-based thinking approach. Students will gain knowledge on assorted topics related to leadership, healthcare business management and health informatics. There is a specific focus on understanding payer relationships, diagnostic coding, current procedural terminology, clinical productivity, and operating margin. The course will prepare students to be stewards of fiscal responsibility and leaders in the field of physical therapy. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This course provides an overview of managing people with neuromusculoskeletal chronic pain syndromes and the associated psychosocial factors using emerging and contemporary concepts of pain assessment, treatment, and outcomes. Use of case simulations builds on previous pain management knowledge and core competencies while advancing motivational interviewing and therapeutic alliance skills. This course emphasizes the core knowledge necessary for offering best care of patients and provides integrated interprofessional perspectives on comprehensive pain management designed to improve patient outcomes.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses

This integrated clinical education course develops student examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during an 8-week mentored clinical experience. The student initiates teamwork and communication with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals and begins to appreciate the role of each team member. This is an integrated experience that builds on the didactic and psychomotor courses within the curriculum. Students begin practice using evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses and demonstrated readiness for clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course strengthens the students' understanding of normal and abnormal physiology of aging, and the sociologic and economic consequences on the individual and society. Use of clinical cases that focus on prioritization and management of co-morbidities (e.g., vascular, or visual compromise, falls, depression, etc.) common in the aging adult strengthens students' clinical reasoning. Advancing patient-centered care and use of motivational interviewing skills is reinforced through live and simulated cases. Lab activities develop patient management skills for care of the aging adult across practice settings, and with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.

Using a framework of normal development from birth to young adulthood, this course presents fundamental concepts for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Current evidence is applied to examination, evaluation, documentation and management of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions of common pediatric conditions. Topics of family centered care, advocacy, and assistive technologies are explored using live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course further develops the framework for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Topics include plan of care development and family centered care strategies to enhance functional outcomes and participation for clients with select acquired and developmental conditions. Advancing clinical reasoning and use of evidence is progressed through live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses

This course advances management strategy prioritization for medically complex patients and integrates culturally competent and mindful patient management concepts throughout. Clinical cases present patients across the lifespan with primary movement system impairments due to diseases, conditions, and comorbidities of the cardiovascular, neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, lymphatic, pulmonary, metabolic /endocrine, reproductive/urologic, and immune systems to strengthen clinical reasoning. Students will incorporate community health informatics and risk mitigation strategies in the design of individual and community-based interventions for effective screening and optimal disease management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.

This course explores the physical therapist’s role as an interdependent practitioner working within a collaborative medical model. By integrating the evidence for medical screening methods, clinical diagnosis, and imaging modalities with clinical cases, students will develop efficient and effective processes for collecting, evaluating, and communicating examination data while advancing differential diagnostic reasoning. Building on prior coursework, clinical scenarios will advance data driven decision-making, applications for wearable and emerging technology, and effective management of patients across all spectrums in the continuum of care. Students will apply wellness, screening, and patient/client education skillsets to improve the health of the GU and/or their local community. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This course expands on the students’ critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and management of patients with movement system dysfunctions. This course is a progression of techniques related to spinal stabilization, movement impairments, and soft tissue dysfunction. Interventions include a progression of exercise therapy, manual therapy techniques, dry needling, manipulation, mobilization, muscle energy, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and proprioceptive/vestibular treatments. Students are provided with expanded knowledge and skills from foundational content previously taught. Lab activities use case scenarios to challenge clinical reasoning for the development and progression of comprehensive treatment plans. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses

This course introduces management strategy prioritization for patients with primary oncologic, integumentary, and lymphatic conditions with secondary co-morbidities across all body systems commonly seen in physical therapist practice. Advancing evidence supported clinical reasoning and building skills to enhance the therapeutic alliance for collaborative decision making with patients and the interprofessional care team is a focus of this course. Use of clinical cases reinforces integration of culturally competent, mindful, and evidence informed care for patients across the lifespan and spectrum of physical therapist practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This seminar course allows students to engage in curricular study that meets identified student learning needs. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop learning and assessment of learning necessary for ongoing development. This course may be taken more than once to guide specific student learning in the DPT program. Course credit hours will be determined by the program director. Course graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Permission of the DPT Program Director

The final course in this series advances student's leadership, and practice management roles across the spectrum of care, and investigates those as a clinical researcher, advocate, educator, and primary care provider. The student explores medical ethics, health care regulations, and practice risk management strategies and how they interact with provision of physical therapy services. Refining strategies to manage fraud and abuse, difficult conversations, situational safety, and challenging clinical scenarios will be a focus of this course. Students will refine a development plan focused on professional growth for the first year of practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, subsession 5-A courses

This course advances the student’s ability to perform examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during a 10-week mentored clinical education experience. The student further develops the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals. Emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, sub session 5-A courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course progresses students to entry-level patient management skills during a 14-week mentored clinical experience. The student refines the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and healthcare professionals while advancing critical reasoning and use of evidence for optimizing patient management. This course emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course allows students to explore contemporary topics in physical therapy practice, professional formation, and preparedness for entry to practice by integrating prior knowledge with evidence on selected topic. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop a learning contract of autonomous study and products of this study sufficient to meet course hour requirements. Students must have a signed learning contract before beginning coursework. Course graded as pass/ fail. May be taken in any semester of the second program year. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all prior DPT coursework

This course integrates and applies cumulative knowledge gained from all previous didactic courses and clinical internship experiences. Throughout this course, students engage in reflective practice in three principal areas including integration of content learned throughout the curriculum, direct application relative to patients managed in the clinical experiences, and professional growth to prepare for practice. Students will compile this reflection into a format that demonstrates their professional formation and articulates how they will uphold the 8 core values for physical therapists as they move into practice. Students develop and implement a study plan to prepare for taking a simulated National Physical Therapy License Exam just prior to graduation. Use of lifelong learner skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses.

This course introduces foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the trunk and lower quarter. Explores the clinical application of genetics, embryology, histology, and basic joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for tissue differential identification. This course addresses the content of the anatomical regions, including the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower extremities. Emphasis is on neuromuscular and musculoskeletal anatomy. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program.

This continues to develop foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the cervicothoracic spine and upper quarter. Explores the clinical application of joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for differential tissue identification. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course explores the physiology and pathophysiology of the cellular, integumentary, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and immune systems. Studies medical physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course introduces pharmacologic principles and studies medications used in the management of common patient conditions encountered during physical therapy care, and their influence on patient management across the lifespan. The impact of medications on patient presentations, timing of rehabilitation sessions, and physical therapy outcomes are emphasized. Content includes common medications for the cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, urogenital, rheumatologic, psychosocial, and integumentary systems. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course offers a framework for understanding normal and abnormal movement by introducing the fundamentals of movement science focused on the areas of kinesiology, neuroscience, physiology, motor control, and motor learning. Integrating theory with basic principles of motor behavior and motor development will be applied to human motor performance and gait across the lifespan. Emphasis is on the integration of theory, structured movement analyses of activities performed in daily life, and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model to inform clinical decision making in physical therapist practice. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course explores the neuroscience of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, neurophysiological functions and developmental sequence of the motor and sensory systems that regulate movement. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course deepens neuroscience understanding of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, pathways and neurophysiological functions that regulate the senses, reflexes posture and the viscera. Lab activities emphasize elements of the neurologic examination and an introduction to common outcome measures and assessment tools. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course prepares the student for patient care activities including patient-centered communication, use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework and introduction to its use in various clinical settings. Students will begin to develop patient interview and documentation skills, perform examination tests and measures, and use standardized patient outcome measures. Use of the International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) model for critical thinking and data categorization is introduced. Psychomotor skills that are foundational to examination and evaluation are introduced, including vital signs, body mechanics awareness, patient positioning and draping, transfers, assistive device training, basic exercise instruction goniometry, range of motion, muscle testing, and anthropometric measures. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

This course introduces and integrates biomechanical principles of joint structure and function, movement analysis, and tissue healing and response to stress. Application of these principles is used to develop basic intervention prescription for the management of patients with acute pain and mobility impairments across the lifespan, with a focus on therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and selected physical agents. Patient cases are presented to build a framework for identifying tissue specific intervention needs based on identified impairment(s) and activity/participation limitations. Integrates current evidence and clinical decision-making to emphasize appropriate selection, instruction, and progression of interventions. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Progra

This course further develops the principles and application of selected physical-agents and therapeutic interventions for the management of patients with pain and tissue injury while addressing impairments related to mobility, strength, and motor control deficits across the lifespan. Integrates tissue healing principles, current evidence, and case presentation into the clinical decision-making framework to appropriately select, instruct, and progress interventions. Concepts for developing therapeutic alliance and empathy are introduced. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course introduces preventive health, wellness, and fitness concepts as they relate to injury prevention, nutritional influences, social determinants of health, fitness testing, and exercise prescription in a healthy population. Students develop injury prevention and exercise programs based on examination results and deliver these to the client using proper procedures and patient-centered communication. Through live or virtual cases, students will learn to modify programs to meet the needs of those with various health literacy and health center access. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course introduces the foundation of general research and evidence-based principles by exploring research methodologies and outcome measures used in health care. Introduces foundational concepts of scientific inquiry for clinicians by creating clinical questions, searching appropriate literature sources, and assessing the evidence quality. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course expands elements of applied research design and statistics that foster students to become intelligent consumers of scientific literature. Items related to measurement, research design, statistical analysis, critical inquiry, and strength of evidence are presented. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

The course defines professional conduct and teaches professional formation and application of lifelong learning skills necessary for developing towards a physical therapy practitioner. Throughout this course, students explore the ethics, core values, and roles and responsibilities of the physical therapist, and the importance of optimizing communication with respect to others' individual and cultural differences, and abilities. Creating an initial professional and lifelong learning skills development plan prepares the student for the professional physical therapy curriculum. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

The second course in this series prepares students professionally and emotionally for physical therapy clinical practice through exploring roles as a lifelong learner, patient advocate, clinical educator, and a member of the interprofessional care team. Students investigate major health care payer models, billing and coding practice, patient care optimization, and health care regulations, and their impact on physical therapy services. This course blends topics through case applications focused on communication, cultural safety, professional behavior and abilities, ethics, legal issues, safety, and risk management perspectives across all practice settings. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course advances use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop strategies for systems differential identification, neuromuscular differential diagnosis and for interprofessional collaboration when needed. This course introduces examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing for select conditions of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and hip regions and develops critical reasoning through use of clinical cases. This course emphasizes application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions targeting patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course continues to develop students' use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework in the examination, evaluation, and treatment sequence of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the lower quarter. Focus is placed on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. This course builds on culturally competent, patient centered care through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

The third course in this series continues use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the head and cervicothoracic region. Concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient centered care and use of sound critical reasoning strategies is developed through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This The final course in this series continues to integrate critical reasoning for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and management of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for musculoskeletal dysfunction of the upper extremities. This course concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient-centered care is advanced through clinical presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course introduces examination and management of movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from central nervous system pathology, with emphasis on traumatic and acquired brain injury, concussion management, and vestibular conditions. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to build on the student’s critical reasoning strategies is integrated through use of clinical cases. Lab experiences develop patient-centered management skills and recovery-based treatment techniques built on neuroplasticity principles for patients with neurologic dysfunction. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course advances examination, evaluation and management of specific movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from nervous system pathology. Emphasis is on spinal cord injury, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and other acquired, genetic, and degenerative nervous system disorders common to physical therapist practice. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework through clinical cases is used to strengthen students critical reasoning for developing comprehensive, patient-centered care plans for patients across the continuum of clinical practice settings. Lab experiences continue integration of critical reasoning for selection, performance and adaptation of examination and interventions skills for treatment and management of patients with neurologic diseases/conditions. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses.

This course builds on the use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop evaluation, examination, and management skills for patients with common cardiovascular, metabolic, and pulmonary causes of movement system dysfunction. Lab activities include, but are not limited to, ECG analysis, exercise testing, heart and lung auscultation, lung function testing, and chest examinations. Case discussions are presented to enhance communication, safety, patient management, application of evidence for practice, and discharge planning skills across a variety of clinical settings. Students develop appropriate observation and clinical skills necessary for completing a comprehensive evaluation and formulating a comprehensive plan of care with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course provides a foundation for physical therapist evaluation and management of integumentary health and decision-making related wounds and vascular diseases that impacts patients/clients across the lifespan. Communication and collaboration with the interprofessional care team to manage patients with integumentary impairments, wounds, and limb amputations is a focus in this course. Combining understanding of lifestyle, psychosocial and social determinants (drivers) of health from prior courses is advanced through direct instruction and case application. Specific principles for management of patients with limb differences and prosthetic needs, including early post-operative management, prosthetic materials, design, fabrication, and technology, and ongoing physical therapy interventions to optimize functional performance is a focus of this course. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses

This course provides an overview of basic business principles, as they relate to the practice of physical therapy with a systems-based thinking approach. Students will gain knowledge on assorted topics related to leadership, healthcare business management and health informatics. There is a specific focus on understanding payer relationships, diagnostic coding, current procedural terminology, clinical productivity, and operating margin. The course will prepare students to be stewards of fiscal responsibility and leaders in the field of physical therapy. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This course provides an overview of managing people with neuromusculoskeletal chronic pain syndromes and the associated psychosocial factors using emerging and contemporary concepts of pain assessment, treatment, and outcomes. Use of case simulations builds on previous pain management knowledge and core competencies while advancing motivational interviewing and therapeutic alliance skills. This course emphasizes the core knowledge necessary for offering best care of patients and provides integrated interprofessional perspectives on comprehensive pain management designed to improve patient outcomes.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses

This integrated clinical education course develops student examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during an 8-week mentored clinical experience. The student initiates teamwork and communication with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals and begins to appreciate the role of each team member. This is an integrated experience that builds on the didactic and psychomotor courses within the curriculum. Students begin practice using evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses and demonstrated readiness for clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course strengthens the students' understanding of normal and abnormal physiology of aging, and the sociologic and economic consequences on the individual and society. Use of clinical cases that focus on prioritization and management of co-morbidities (e.g., vascular, or visual compromise, falls, depression, etc.) common in the aging adult strengthens students' clinical reasoning. Advancing patient-centered care and use of motivational interviewing skills is reinforced through live and simulated cases. Lab activities develop patient management skills for care of the aging adult across practice settings, and with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.

Using a framework of normal development from birth to young adulthood, this course presents fundamental concepts for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Current evidence is applied to examination, evaluation, documentation and management of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions of common pediatric conditions. Topics of family centered care, advocacy, and assistive technologies are explored using live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses

This course further develops the framework for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Topics include plan of care development and family centered care strategies to enhance functional outcomes and participation for clients with select acquired and developmental conditions. Advancing clinical reasoning and use of evidence is progressed through live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses

This course advances management strategy prioritization for medically complex patients and integrates culturally competent and mindful patient management concepts throughout. Clinical cases present patients across the lifespan with primary movement system impairments due to diseases, conditions, and comorbidities of the cardiovascular, neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, lymphatic, pulmonary, metabolic /endocrine, reproductive/urologic, and immune systems to strengthen clinical reasoning. Students will incorporate community health informatics and risk mitigation strategies in the design of individual and community-based interventions for effective screening and optimal disease management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.

This course explores the physical therapist’s role as an interdependent practitioner working within a collaborative medical model. By integrating the evidence for medical screening methods, clinical diagnosis, and imaging modalities with clinical cases, students will develop efficient and effective processes for collecting, evaluating, and communicating examination data while advancing differential diagnostic reasoning. Building on prior coursework, clinical scenarios will advance data driven decision-making, applications for wearable and emerging technology, and effective management of patients across all spectrums in the continuum of care. Students will apply wellness, screening, and patient/client education skillsets to improve the health of the GU and/or their local community. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This course expands on the students’ critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and management of patients with movement system dysfunctions. This course is a progression of techniques related to spinal stabilization, movement impairments, and soft tissue dysfunction. Interventions include a progression of exercise therapy, manual therapy techniques, dry needling, manipulation, mobilization, muscle energy, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and proprioceptive/vestibular treatments. Students are provided with expanded knowledge and skills from foundational content previously taught. Lab activities use case scenarios to challenge clinical reasoning for the development and progression of comprehensive treatment plans. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses

This course introduces management strategy prioritization for patients with primary oncologic, integumentary, and lymphatic conditions with secondary co-morbidities across all body systems commonly seen in physical therapist practice. Advancing evidence supported clinical reasoning and building skills to enhance the therapeutic alliance for collaborative decision making with patients and the interprofessional care team is a focus of this course. Use of clinical cases reinforces integration of culturally competent, mindful, and evidence informed care for patients across the lifespan and spectrum of physical therapist practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.

This seminar course allows students to engage in curricular study that meets identified student learning needs. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop learning and assessment of learning necessary for ongoing development. This course may be taken more than once to guide specific student learning in the DPT program. Course credit hours will be determined by the program director. Course graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Permission of the DPT Program Director

The final course in this series advances student's leadership, and practice management roles across the spectrum of care, and investigates those as a clinical researcher, advocate, educator, and primary care provider. The student explores medical ethics, health care regulations, and practice risk management strategies and how they interact with provision of physical therapy services. Refining strategies to manage fraud and abuse, difficult conversations, situational safety, and challenging clinical scenarios will be a focus of this course. Students will refine a development plan focused on professional growth for the first year of practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, subsession 5-A courses

This course advances the student’s ability to perform examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during a 10-week mentored clinical education experience. The student further develops the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals. Emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, sub session 5-A courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course progresses students to entry-level patient management skills during a 14-week mentored clinical experience. The student refines the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and healthcare professionals while advancing critical reasoning and use of evidence for optimizing patient management. This course emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)

This course allows students to explore contemporary topics in physical therapy practice, professional formation, and preparedness for entry to practice by integrating prior knowledge with evidence on selected topic. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop a learning contract of autonomous study and products of this study sufficient to meet course hour requirements. Students must have a signed learning contract before beginning coursework. Course graded as pass/ fail. May be taken in any semester of the second program year. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all prior DPT coursework

This course integrates and applies cumulative knowledge gained from all previous didactic courses and clinical internship experiences. Throughout this course, students engage in reflective practice in three principal areas including integration of content learned throughout the curriculum, direct application relative to patients managed in the clinical experiences, and professional growth to prepare for practice. Students will compile this reflection into a format that demonstrates their professional formation and articulates how they will uphold the 8 core values for physical therapists as they move into practice. Students develop and implement a study plan to prepare for taking a simulated National Physical Therapy License Exam just prior to graduation. Use of lifelong learner skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses.

Register for a free informational webinar to learn more about what a hybrid, accelerated program can look like for you.

The following tuition rates and associated costs are for the 2024-2025 academic year and apply to students enrolled in the Doctor of Physical Therapy Program (DPT) program starting in January 2025. The costs indicated below are only an estimate and may be different from the student’s total expenditures. Variable costs of the program include lodging, food, and travel to/from lab immersions and clinical education rotations. In addition, textbooks, computer requirements (laptop computer & mobile device) and hardware/software will vary slightly based on individual student preferences.

Financial Fact Sheet

Physical therapists are movement experts who practice in various settings, including hospitals, outpatient clinics, fitness facilities, and nursing homes. Learn more about the salary, practice settings, and career outlook of a physical therapist on theAmerican Physical Therapy Association’s careers page.

Learn more about current job openings atjobs.apta.org.

Effective December 1, 2023, Graceland University has been granted Candidate for Accreditation status by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education (3030 Potomac Ave., Suite 100, Alexandria, Virginia 22305-3085; phone:703-706-3245; email:accreditation@apta.org). If needing to contact the program/institution directly, please call 816-423-4700 or emaildpt-program@graceland.edu.

Candidate for Accreditation is an accreditation status of affiliation with the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education that indicates the program may matriculate students in technical/professional courses. Achievement of Candidate for Accreditation status does not assure that the program will be granted Initial Accreditation.

Candidacy is considered to be an accredited status, as such the credits and degree earned from a program with Candidacy status are considered, by CAPTE, to be from an accredited program. Therefore, students in the charter (first) class should be eligible to take the licensure exam even if CAPTE withholds accreditation at the end of the candidacy period. That said, it is up to each state licensing agency, not CAPTE, to determine who is eligible for licensure. Information on licensing requirements should be directed to the Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy (FSBPT;www.fsbpt.org) or specific state boards (a list of state boards and contact information is available on FSBPT’s website).

Complaints to the Accrediting BodyAny individual who would like to file a complaint with CAPTE regarding what appears to be the Graceland DPT Program’s inability to meet an evaluative criterion may do so by following the directions provided on the CAPTE website (capteonline.org/Complaints) or may call the Department of Accreditation of APTA at703.706.3245.

ComplaintsComplaints involving faculty, staff or students, discrimination or harassment, or complaints involving grades or academic integrity, should follow the procedures outlined in Graceland University Lamoni Campus Student Handbook (for students) and Graceland University Employee Handbook (for faculty and staff), both found on mygraceland.edu. Graceland University faculty, staff and students are protected from retaliation for complaints made in good faith.

Any individual external to the University may file a complaint regarding aspects of the Graceland University DPT Program. Complaints should be referred to the DPT program director without fear of retaliation. Contact DPT Program Director Dr. Leigh Murray at816.423.4681orlmurray1@graceland.edu. The DPT program director will determine the appropriate course of resolution with consultation from the other Directors within the DPT program. In instances where there is an apparent or perceived conflict of interest, individuals may recuse themselves from the proceedings. In instances where the program director is the source of concern or complaint, issues should be referred to interim Vice President for Academic Affairs and Dean of Faculty, Dr. Jacqueline McGlade at641.784.5115orgim6@graceland.edu.

Graceland University is a member of the National Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement (SARA). SARA is an agreement among member states, districts and territories that establishes national standards for interstate offering of postsecondary distance education.

Preparation for Professional Licensure

National Physical Therapy Examination (NPTE)

National Council of State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement (SARA)

### Program Outcomes

Graceland DPT will provide outcomes for licensure exam pass rate, graduation rate, and employment rate beginning in 2026.

Questions?

1 University Pl,Lamoni, IA 50140641.784.5000866.472.2352Campus Map

1401 W. Truman Road,Independence, MO  64050816.833.0524800.833.0524

We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.

You can find out more about which cookies we are using or switch them off insettings.

This website uses cookies so that we can provide you with the best user experience possible. Cookie information is stored in your browser and performs functions such as recognizing you when you return to our website and helping our team to understand which sections of the website you find most interesting and useful.

Strictly Necessary Cookie should be enabled at all times so that we can save your preferences for cookie settings.

If you disable this cookie, we will not be able to save your preferences. This means that every time you visit this website you will need to enable or disable cookies again.

This website uses Google Analytics to collect anonymous information such as the number of visitors to the site, and the most popular pages.

Keeping this cookie enabled helps us to improve our website.

Please enable Strictly Necessary Cookies first so that we can save your preferences!


## Additional List Items

- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- Go Back
- AcademicsMajors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing ArtsAdult and Graduate StudiesProfessional Continuing Education with SkillPathAcademic CalendarAcademic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate CatalogHonors ProgramScholars ShowcaseLibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske LibraryFeatured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Majors & ProgramsBusinessCSIT and Data ScienceEducationHealth and Movement ScienceHumanitiesNatural and Physical SciencesNursingPhysical TherapySeminarySocial SciencesVisual & Performing Arts
- Business
- CSIT and Data Science
- Education
- Health and Movement Science
- Humanities
- Natural and Physical Sciences
- Nursing
- Physical Therapy
- Seminary
- Social Sciences
- Visual & Performing Arts
- Adult and Graduate Studies
- Professional Continuing Education with SkillPath
- Academic Calendar
- Academic CatalogsUndergraduate CatalogGraduate Catalog
- Undergraduate Catalog
- Graduate Catalog
- Honors Program
- Scholars Showcase
- LibrariesFrederick Madison Smith LibraryDr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Frederick Madison Smith Library
- Dr. Charles F. Grabske Library
- Featured ProgramNursing Degree ProgramOur comprehensive nursing curriculum offers 2-year RN programs.Learn More
- Admissions & AidAccepted StudentsUndergraduate AdmissionsGraduate AdmissionsInternational Student AdmissionsMilitary and Veterans AdmissionsOnline AdmissionsTransfer AdmissionsAdmissions AdvisorsParents/FamilyTuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price CalculatorRequest Information
- Accepted Students
- Undergraduate Admissions
- Graduate Admissions
- International Student Admissions
- Military and Veterans Admissions
- Online Admissions
- Transfer Admissions
- Admissions Advisors
- Parents/Family
- Tuition and Financial AidTuition and FeesGraceland ScholarshipsNet Price Calculator
- Tuition and Fees
- Graceland Scholarships
- Net Price Calculator
- Request Information
- Student LifeCampus LivingHouse Social SystemDiningGet InvolvedVisual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box OfficeCampus SafetySupport ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability ServicesIndependence Campus
- Campus Living
- House Social System
- Dining
- Get Involved
- Visual and Performing ArtsArt DepartmentMusic DepartmentTheatre DepartmentShaw Box Office
- Art Department
- Music Department
- Theatre Department
- Shaw Box Office
- Campus Safety
- Support ServicesTRIOWriting CenterFirst Year ExperienceTutoringIntercultural OfficeMental Health ServicesDisability Services
- TRIO
- Writing Center
- First Year Experience
- Tutoring
- Intercultural Office
- Mental Health Services
- Disability Services
- Independence Campus
- AboutQuick FactsCampus LocationsNews & EventsLeadershipCareers at Graceland UniversityHistoryGraceland + SkillPathCommunity of ChristAccreditationBlog
- Quick Facts
- Campus Locations
- News & Events
- Leadership
- Careers at Graceland University
- History
- Graceland + SkillPath
- Community of Christ
- Accreditation
- Blog
- Athletics
- AlumniAlumni Board of DirectorsBenefits and AdvantagesHorizonsSubmit a Class NoteGraceland Spirit ShopAlumni GearConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality FormEventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni AssociationGiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Board of Directors
- Benefits and Advantages
- HorizonsSubmit a Class Note
- Submit a Class Note
- Graceland Spirit ShopAlumni Gear
- Alumni Gear
- ConnectEventsGU4UUpdate Your InformationInstitutional Advancement TeamGraceland LiveVolunteer Confidentiality Form
- Events
- GU4U
- Update Your Information
- Institutional Advancement Team
- Graceland Live
- Volunteer Confidentiality Form
- EventsHomecoming#Grateful4GracelandAlumni SwarmGolf ClassicGraceland LiveGraceland Football Alumni Association
- Homecoming
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Alumni Swarm
- Golf Classic
- Graceland Live
- Graceland Football Alumni Association
- GiveAlumni Endowed Scholarship#Grateful4GracelandBrick PlazaThe Graceland FundFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Brick Plaza
- The Graceland Fund
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- Visit
- GiveGiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- GiveAlumni Endowed ScholarshipFundraising CampaignsGiving Clubs#Grateful4GracelandEndowmentsThe Graceland FundYellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- Alumni Endowed Scholarship
- Fundraising Campaigns
- Giving Clubs
- #Grateful4Graceland
- Endowments
- The Graceland Fund
- Yellow Jackets Women’s Philanthropy Circle
- LoginsmyGracelandBrightspaceEmail Link (Office 365)Merit Pages
- myGraceland
- Brightspace
- Email Link (Office 365)
- Merit Pages
- Course Calendar - Year 1TermTrimester SessionCourse NumberCourse NameCourse Credit11-ASpringDPTP 8130Human Physiology3DPTP 8101Human Anatomy I4DPTP 8310Physical Therapy Fundamentals3DPTP 8411Professional Competencies I*11-BSpringDPTP 8102Human Anatomy II3DPTP 8140Pharmacology2DPTP 8150Movement Science2DPTP 8321Therapeutic Interventions I222-ASummerDPTP 8501Musculoskeletal Practice I3DPTP 8322Therapeutic Interventions II3DPTP 8330Health Promotion & Fitness Management2DPTP 8201Clinical Neuroscience I12-BSummerDPTP 8302Clinical Neuroscience II2DPTP 8401Evidence-based Practice I2DPTP 8502Musculoskeletal Practice II3DPTP 8640Integumentary I233-AFallDPTP 8503Musculoskeletal Practice III3DPTP 8601Neuromuscular Practice I2DPTP 8620Cardiopulmonary Practice4DPTP 8412Professional Competencies II13-BFallDPTP 8720Pediatric Practice I2DPTP 8504Musculoskeletal Practice IV3DPTP 8602Neuromuscular Practice II3DPTP 8402Evidence-based Practice II2Total credit hours – Year 1:58
- Course Calendar - Year 2TermTrimester SessionCourse NumberCourse NameCourse Credit44-ASpringDPTP 8701Physical Therapy Practice I (8 weeks)84-BSpringDPTP 8721Pediatric Practice II1DPTP 8660Business Management & Leadership3DPTP 8700Integrative Pain Sciences2DPTP 8740Primary Care PT: Tools & Technology3DPTP 8760Integumentary II355-ASummerDPTP 8730Management of Complex Patients2DPTP 8710Management of the Aging Adult2DPTP 8750Advanced Therapeutic Interventions25-BSummerDPTP 9702Physical Therapy Practice II (10 weeks)10DPTP 9412Professional Competencies III166-FallDPTP 9703Physical Therapy Practice III (14 weeks)*14DPTP 9711Capstone2DPTP 9710PT Independent Study**1Total credit hours – Year 2:54
- Course DescriptionsCourses OfferedDPTP8101Human Anatomy IDPTP8101Human Anatomy I  - 4 s.h.This course introduces foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the trunk and lower quarter. Explores the clinical application of genetics, embryology, histology, and basic joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for tissue differential identification. This course addresses the content of the anatomical regions, including the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower extremities. Emphasis is on neuromuscular and musculoskeletal anatomy. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program.DPTP8102Human Anatomy IIDPTP8102Human Anatomy II  - 3 s.h.This continues to develop foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the cervicothoracic spine and upper quarter. Explores the clinical application of joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for differential tissue identification. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8130Human PhysiologyDPTP8130Human Physiology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physiology and pathophysiology of the cellular, integumentary, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and immune systems. Studies medical physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8140PharmacologyDPTP8140Pharmacology  - 2 s.h.This course introduces pharmacologic principles and studies medications used in the management of common patient conditions encountered during physical therapy care, and their influence on patient management across the lifespan. The impact of medications on patient presentations, timing of rehabilitation sessions, and physical therapy outcomes are emphasized. Content includes common medications for the cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, urogenital, rheumatologic, psychosocial, and integumentary systems. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8150Movement ScienceDPTP8150Movement Science  - 2 s.h.This course offers a framework for understanding normal and abnormal movement by introducing the fundamentals of movement science focused on the areas of kinesiology, neuroscience, physiology, motor control, and motor learning. Integrating theory with basic principles of motor behavior and motor development will be applied to human motor performance and gait across the lifespan. Emphasis is on the integration of theory, structured movement analyses of activities performed in daily life, and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model to inform clinical decision making in physical therapist practice. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience IDPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience I  - 1 s.h.This course explores the neuroscience of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, neurophysiological functions and developmental sequence of the motor and sensory systems that regulate movement. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience IIDPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience II  - 2 s.h.This course deepens neuroscience understanding of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, pathways and neurophysiological functions that regulate the senses, reflexes posture and the viscera. Lab activities emphasize elements of the neurologic examination and an introduction to common outcome measures and assessment tools. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8310Physical Therapy FundamentalsDPTP8310Physical Therapy Fundamentals  - 3 s.h.This course prepares the student for patient care activities including patient-centered communication, use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework and introduction to its use in various clinical settings. Students will begin to develop patient interview and documentation skills, perform examination tests and measures, and use standardized patient outcome measures. Use of the International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) model for critical thinking and data categorization is introduced. Psychomotor skills that are foundational to examination and evaluation are introduced, including vital signs, body mechanics awareness, patient positioning and draping, transfers, assistive device training, basic exercise instruction goniometry, range of motion, muscle testing, and anthropometric measures. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions IDPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces and integrates biomechanical principles of joint structure and function, movement analysis, and tissue healing and response to stress. Application of these principles is used to develop basic intervention prescription for the management of patients with acute pain and mobility impairments across the lifespan, with a focus on therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and selected physical agents. Patient cases are presented to build a framework for identifying tissue specific intervention needs based on identified impairment(s) and activity/participation limitations. Integrates current evidence and clinical decision-making to emphasize appropriate selection, instruction, and progression of interventions. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy PrograDPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions IIDPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions II  - 3 s.h.This course further develops the principles and application of selected physical-agents and therapeutic interventions for the management of patients with pain and tissue injury while addressing impairments related to mobility, strength, and motor control deficits across the lifespan. Integrates tissue healing principles, current evidence, and case presentation into the clinical decision-making framework to appropriately select, instruct, and progress interventions. Concepts for developing therapeutic alliance and empathy are introduced. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness ManagementDPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness Management  - 2 s.h.This course introduces preventive health, wellness, and fitness concepts as they relate to injury prevention, nutritional influences, social determinants of health, fitness testing, and exercise prescription in a healthy population. Students develop injury prevention and exercise programs based on examination results and deliver these to the client using proper procedures and patient-centered communication. Through live or virtual cases, students will learn to modify programs to meet the needs of those with various health literacy and health center access. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice IDPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces the foundation of general research and evidence-based principles by exploring research methodologies and outcome measures used in health care. Introduces foundational concepts of scientific inquiry for clinicians by creating clinical questions, searching appropriate literature sources, and assessing the evidence quality. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice IIDPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice II  - 2 s.h.This course expands elements of applied research design and statistics that foster students to become intelligent consumers of scientific literature. Items related to measurement, research design, statistical analysis, critical inquiry, and strength of evidence are presented. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8411Professional Competencies IDPTP8411Professional Competencies I  - 1 s.h.The course defines professional conduct and teaches professional formation and application of lifelong learning skills necessary for developing towards a physical therapy practitioner. Throughout this course, students explore the ethics, core values, and roles and responsibilities of the physical therapist, and the importance of optimizing communication with respect to others' individual and cultural differences, and abilities. Creating an initial professional and lifelong learning skills development plan prepares the student for the professional physical therapy curriculum. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8412Professional Competencies IIDPTP8412Professional Competencies II  - 1 s.h.The second course in this series prepares students professionally and emotionally for physical therapy clinical practice through exploring roles as a lifelong learner, patient advocate, clinical educator, and a member of the interprofessional care team. Students investigate major health care payer models, billing and coding practice, patient care optimization, and health care regulations, and their impact on physical therapy services. This course blends topics through case applications focused on communication, cultural safety, professional behavior and abilities, ethics, legal issues, safety, and risk management perspectives across all practice settings. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice IDPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice I  - 3 s.h.This course advances use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop strategies for systems differential identification, neuromuscular differential diagnosis and for interprofessional collaboration when needed. This course introduces examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing for select conditions of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and hip regions and develops critical reasoning through use of clinical cases. This course emphasizes application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions targeting patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice IIDPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course continues to develop students' use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework in the examination, evaluation, and treatment sequence of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the lower quarter. Focus is placed on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. This course builds on culturally competent, patient centered care through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice IIIDPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice III  - 3 s.h.The third course in this series continues use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the head and cervicothoracic region. Concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient centered care and use of sound critical reasoning strategies is developed through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IVDPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IV  - 3 s.h.This The final course in this series continues to integrate critical reasoning for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and management of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for musculoskeletal dysfunction of the upper extremities. This course concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient-centered care is advanced through clinical presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice IDPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces examination and management of movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from central nervous system pathology, with emphasis on traumatic and acquired brain injury, concussion management, and vestibular conditions. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to build on the student’s critical reasoning strategies is integrated through use of clinical cases. Lab experiences develop patient-centered management skills and recovery-based treatment techniques built on neuroplasticity principles for patients with neurologic dysfunction. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice IIDPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course advances examination, evaluation and management of specific movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from nervous system pathology. Emphasis is on spinal cord injury, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and other acquired, genetic, and degenerative nervous system disorders common to physical therapist practice. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework through clinical cases is used to strengthen students critical reasoning for developing comprehensive, patient-centered care plans for patients across the continuum of clinical practice settings. Lab experiences continue integration of critical reasoning for selection, performance and adaptation of examination and interventions skills for treatment and management of patients with neurologic diseases/conditions. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses.DPTP8620Cardiopulmonary PracticeDPTP8620Cardiopulmonary Practice  - 4 s.h.This course builds on the use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop evaluation, examination, and management skills for patients with common cardiovascular, metabolic, and pulmonary causes of movement system dysfunction. Lab activities include, but are not limited to, ECG analysis, exercise testing, heart and lung auscultation, lung function testing, and chest examinations. Case discussions are presented to enhance communication, safety, patient management, application of evidence for practice, and discharge planning skills across a variety of clinical settings. Students develop appropriate observation and clinical skills necessary for completing a comprehensive evaluation and formulating a comprehensive plan of care with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8640Integumentary IDPTP8640Integumentary I  - 2 s.h.This course provides a foundation for physical therapist evaluation and management of integumentary health and decision-making related wounds and vascular diseases that impacts patients/clients across the lifespan. Communication and collaboration with the interprofessional care team to manage patients with integumentary impairments, wounds, and limb amputations is a focus in this course. Combining understanding of lifestyle, psychosocial and social determinants (drivers) of health from prior courses is advanced through direct instruction and case application. Specific principles for management of patients with limb differences and prosthetic needs, including early post-operative management, prosthetic materials, design, fabrication, and technology, and ongoing physical therapy interventions to optimize functional performance is a focus of this course. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8660Business Management & LeadershipDPTP8660Business Management & Leadership  - 3 s.h.This course provides an overview of basic business principles, as they relate to the practice of physical therapy with a systems-based thinking approach. Students will gain knowledge on assorted topics related to leadership, healthcare business management and health informatics. There is a specific focus on understanding payer relationships, diagnostic coding, current procedural terminology, clinical productivity, and operating margin. The course will prepare students to be stewards of fiscal responsibility and leaders in the field of physical therapy. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8700Integrative Pain SciencesDPTP8700Integrative Pain Sciences  - 2 s.h.This course provides an overview of managing people with neuromusculoskeletal chronic pain syndromes and the associated psychosocial factors using emerging and contemporary concepts of pain assessment, treatment, and outcomes. Use of case simulations builds on previous pain management knowledge and core competencies while advancing motivational interviewing and therapeutic alliance skills. This course emphasizes the core knowledge necessary for offering best care of patients and provides integrated interprofessional perspectives on comprehensive pain management designed to improve patient outcomes.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 coursesDPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice IDPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice I  - 8 s.h.This integrated clinical education course develops student examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during an 8-week mentored clinical experience. The student initiates teamwork and communication with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals and begins to appreciate the role of each team member. This is an integrated experience that builds on the didactic and psychomotor courses within the curriculum. Students begin practice using evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses and demonstrated readiness for clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP8710Management of the Aging AdultDPTP8710Management of the Aging Adult  - 2 s.h.This course strengthens the students' understanding of normal and abnormal physiology of aging, and the sociologic and economic consequences on the individual and society. Use of clinical cases that focus on prioritization and management of co-morbidities (e.g., vascular, or visual compromise, falls, depression, etc.) common in the aging adult strengthens students' clinical reasoning. Advancing patient-centered care and use of motivational interviewing skills is reinforced through live and simulated cases. Lab activities develop patient management skills for care of the aging adult across practice settings, and with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.DPTP8720Pediatric Practice IDPTP8720Pediatric Practice I  - 2 s.h.Using a framework of normal development from birth to young adulthood, this course presents fundamental concepts for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Current evidence is applied to examination, evaluation, documentation and management of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions of common pediatric conditions. Topics of family centered care, advocacy, and assistive technologies are explored using live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8721Pediatric Practice IIDPTP8721Pediatric Practice II  - 1 s.h.This course further develops the framework for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Topics include plan of care development and family centered care strategies to enhance functional outcomes and participation for clients with select acquired and developmental conditions. Advancing clinical reasoning and use of evidence is progressed through live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 coursesDPTP8730Management of Complex PatientsDPTP8730Management of Complex Patients  - 2 s.h.This course advances management strategy prioritization for medically complex patients and integrates culturally competent and mindful patient management concepts throughout. Clinical cases present patients across the lifespan with primary movement system impairments due to diseases, conditions, and comorbidities of the cardiovascular, neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, lymphatic, pulmonary, metabolic /endocrine, reproductive/urologic, and immune systems to strengthen clinical reasoning. Students will incorporate community health informatics and risk mitigation strategies in the design of individual and community-based interventions for effective screening and optimal disease management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.DPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & TechnologyDPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & Technology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physical therapist’s role as an interdependent practitioner working within a collaborative medical model. By integrating the evidence for medical screening methods, clinical diagnosis, and imaging modalities with clinical cases, students will develop efficient and effective processes for collecting, evaluating, and communicating examination data while advancing differential diagnostic reasoning. Building on prior coursework, clinical scenarios will advance data driven decision-making, applications for wearable and emerging technology, and effective management of patients across all spectrums in the continuum of care. Students will apply wellness, screening, and patient/client education skillsets to improve the health of the GU and/or their local community. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic InterventionsDPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic Interventions  - 2 s.h.This course expands on the students’ critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and management of patients with movement system dysfunctions. This course is a progression of techniques related to spinal stabilization, movement impairments, and soft tissue dysfunction. Interventions include a progression of exercise therapy, manual therapy techniques, dry needling, manipulation, mobilization, muscle energy, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and proprioceptive/vestibular treatments. Students are provided with expanded knowledge and skills from foundational content previously taught. Lab activities use case scenarios to challenge clinical reasoning for the development and progression of comprehensive treatment plans. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 coursesDPTP8760Integumentary IIDPTP8760Integumentary II  - 3 s.h.This course introduces management strategy prioritization for patients with primary oncologic, integumentary, and lymphatic conditions with secondary co-morbidities across all body systems commonly seen in physical therapist practice. Advancing evidence supported clinical reasoning and building skills to enhance the therapeutic alliance for collaborative decision making with patients and the interprofessional care team is a focus of this course. Use of clinical cases reinforces integration of culturally competent, mindful, and evidence informed care for patients across the lifespan and spectrum of physical therapist practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8900PT SeminarDPTP8900PT Seminar  - 1-3 s.h.This seminar course allows students to engage in curricular study that meets identified student learning needs. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop learning and assessment of learning necessary for ongoing development. This course may be taken more than once to guide specific student learning in the DPT program. Course credit hours will be determined by the program director. Course graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Permission of the DPT Program DirectorDPTP9412Professional Competencies IIIDPTP9412Professional Competencies III  - 1 s.h.The final course in this series advances student's leadership, and practice management roles across the spectrum of care, and investigates those as a clinical researcher, advocate, educator, and primary care provider. The student explores medical ethics, health care regulations, and practice risk management strategies and how they interact with provision of physical therapy services. Refining strategies to manage fraud and abuse, difficult conversations, situational safety, and challenging clinical scenarios will be a focus of this course. Students will refine a development plan focused on professional growth for the first year of practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, subsession 5-A coursesDPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice IIDPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice II  - 10 s.h.This course advances the student’s ability to perform examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during a 10-week mentored clinical education experience. The student further develops the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals. Emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, sub session 5-A courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice IIIDPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice III  - 14 s.h.This course progresses students to entry-level patient management skills during a 14-week mentored clinical experience. The student refines the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and healthcare professionals while advancing critical reasoning and use of evidence for optimizing patient management. This course emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP9710PT Independent StudyDPTP9710PT Independent Study  - 1 s.h.This course allows students to explore contemporary topics in physical therapy practice, professional formation, and preparedness for entry to practice by integrating prior knowledge with evidence on selected topic. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop a learning contract of autonomous study and products of this study sufficient to meet course hour requirements. Students must have a signed learning contract before beginning coursework. Course graded as pass/ fail. May be taken in any semester of the second program year. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all prior DPT courseworkDPTP9711CapstoneDPTP9711Capstone  - 2 s.h.This course integrates and applies cumulative knowledge gained from all previous didactic courses and clinical internship experiences. Throughout this course, students engage in reflective practice in three principal areas including integration of content learned throughout the curriculum, direct application relative to patients managed in the clinical experiences, and professional growth to prepare for practice. Students will compile this reflection into a format that demonstrates their professional formation and articulates how they will uphold the 8 core values for physical therapists as they move into practice. Students develop and implement a study plan to prepare for taking a simulated National Physical Therapy License Exam just prior to graduation. Use of lifelong learner skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses.DPTP8101Human Anatomy IDPTP8102Human Anatomy IIDPTP8130Human PhysiologyDPTP8140PharmacologyDPTP8150Movement ScienceDPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience IDPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience IIDPTP8310Physical Therapy FundamentalsDPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions IDPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions IIDPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness ManagementDPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice IDPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice IIDPTP8411Professional Competencies IDPTP8412Professional Competencies IIDPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice IDPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice IIDPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice IIIDPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IVDPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice IDPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice IIDPTP8620Cardiopulmonary PracticeDPTP8640Integumentary IDPTP8660Business Management & LeadershipDPTP8700Integrative Pain SciencesDPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice IDPTP8710Management of the Aging AdultDPTP8720Pediatric Practice IDPTP8721Pediatric Practice IIDPTP8730Management of Complex PatientsDPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & TechnologyDPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic InterventionsDPTP8760Integumentary IIDPTP8900PT SeminarDPTP9412Professional Competencies IIIDPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice IIDPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice IIIDPTP9710PT Independent StudyDPTP9711CapstoneCourse DescriptionsDPTP8101Human Anatomy I  - 4 s.h.This course introduces foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the trunk and lower quarter. Explores the clinical application of genetics, embryology, histology, and basic joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for tissue differential identification. This course addresses the content of the anatomical regions, including the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower extremities. Emphasis is on neuromuscular and musculoskeletal anatomy. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program.DPTP8102Human Anatomy II  - 3 s.h.This continues to develop foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the cervicothoracic spine and upper quarter. Explores the clinical application of joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for differential tissue identification. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8130Human Physiology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physiology and pathophysiology of the cellular, integumentary, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and immune systems. Studies medical physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8140Pharmacology  - 2 s.h.This course introduces pharmacologic principles and studies medications used in the management of common patient conditions encountered during physical therapy care, and their influence on patient management across the lifespan. The impact of medications on patient presentations, timing of rehabilitation sessions, and physical therapy outcomes are emphasized. Content includes common medications for the cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, urogenital, rheumatologic, psychosocial, and integumentary systems. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8150Movement Science  - 2 s.h.This course offers a framework for understanding normal and abnormal movement by introducing the fundamentals of movement science focused on the areas of kinesiology, neuroscience, physiology, motor control, and motor learning. Integrating theory with basic principles of motor behavior and motor development will be applied to human motor performance and gait across the lifespan. Emphasis is on the integration of theory, structured movement analyses of activities performed in daily life, and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model to inform clinical decision making in physical therapist practice. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience I  - 1 s.h.This course explores the neuroscience of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, neurophysiological functions and developmental sequence of the motor and sensory systems that regulate movement. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience II  - 2 s.h.This course deepens neuroscience understanding of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, pathways and neurophysiological functions that regulate the senses, reflexes posture and the viscera. Lab activities emphasize elements of the neurologic examination and an introduction to common outcome measures and assessment tools. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8310Physical Therapy Fundamentals  - 3 s.h.This course prepares the student for patient care activities including patient-centered communication, use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework and introduction to its use in various clinical settings. Students will begin to develop patient interview and documentation skills, perform examination tests and measures, and use standardized patient outcome measures. Use of the International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) model for critical thinking and data categorization is introduced. Psychomotor skills that are foundational to examination and evaluation are introduced, including vital signs, body mechanics awareness, patient positioning and draping, transfers, assistive device training, basic exercise instruction goniometry, range of motion, muscle testing, and anthropometric measures. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces and integrates biomechanical principles of joint structure and function, movement analysis, and tissue healing and response to stress. Application of these principles is used to develop basic intervention prescription for the management of patients with acute pain and mobility impairments across the lifespan, with a focus on therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and selected physical agents. Patient cases are presented to build a framework for identifying tissue specific intervention needs based on identified impairment(s) and activity/participation limitations. Integrates current evidence and clinical decision-making to emphasize appropriate selection, instruction, and progression of interventions. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy PrograDPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions II  - 3 s.h.This course further develops the principles and application of selected physical-agents and therapeutic interventions for the management of patients with pain and tissue injury while addressing impairments related to mobility, strength, and motor control deficits across the lifespan. Integrates tissue healing principles, current evidence, and case presentation into the clinical decision-making framework to appropriately select, instruct, and progress interventions. Concepts for developing therapeutic alliance and empathy are introduced. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness Management  - 2 s.h.This course introduces preventive health, wellness, and fitness concepts as they relate to injury prevention, nutritional influences, social determinants of health, fitness testing, and exercise prescription in a healthy population. Students develop injury prevention and exercise programs based on examination results and deliver these to the client using proper procedures and patient-centered communication. Through live or virtual cases, students will learn to modify programs to meet the needs of those with various health literacy and health center access. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces the foundation of general research and evidence-based principles by exploring research methodologies and outcome measures used in health care. Introduces foundational concepts of scientific inquiry for clinicians by creating clinical questions, searching appropriate literature sources, and assessing the evidence quality. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice II  - 2 s.h.This course expands elements of applied research design and statistics that foster students to become intelligent consumers of scientific literature. Items related to measurement, research design, statistical analysis, critical inquiry, and strength of evidence are presented. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8411Professional Competencies I  - 1 s.h.The course defines professional conduct and teaches professional formation and application of lifelong learning skills necessary for developing towards a physical therapy practitioner. Throughout this course, students explore the ethics, core values, and roles and responsibilities of the physical therapist, and the importance of optimizing communication with respect to others' individual and cultural differences, and abilities. Creating an initial professional and lifelong learning skills development plan prepares the student for the professional physical therapy curriculum. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy ProgramDPTP8412Professional Competencies II  - 1 s.h.The second course in this series prepares students professionally and emotionally for physical therapy clinical practice through exploring roles as a lifelong learner, patient advocate, clinical educator, and a member of the interprofessional care team. Students investigate major health care payer models, billing and coding practice, patient care optimization, and health care regulations, and their impact on physical therapy services. This course blends topics through case applications focused on communication, cultural safety, professional behavior and abilities, ethics, legal issues, safety, and risk management perspectives across all practice settings. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice I  - 3 s.h.This course advances use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop strategies for systems differential identification, neuromuscular differential diagnosis and for interprofessional collaboration when needed. This course introduces examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing for select conditions of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and hip regions and develops critical reasoning through use of clinical cases. This course emphasizes application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions targeting patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course continues to develop students' use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework in the examination, evaluation, and treatment sequence of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the lower quarter. Focus is placed on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. This course builds on culturally competent, patient centered care through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice III  - 3 s.h.The third course in this series continues use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the head and cervicothoracic region. Concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient centered care and use of sound critical reasoning strategies is developed through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IV  - 3 s.h.This The final course in this series continues to integrate critical reasoning for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and management of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for musculoskeletal dysfunction of the upper extremities. This course concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient-centered care is advanced through clinical presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces examination and management of movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from central nervous system pathology, with emphasis on traumatic and acquired brain injury, concussion management, and vestibular conditions. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to build on the student’s critical reasoning strategies is integrated through use of clinical cases. Lab experiences develop patient-centered management skills and recovery-based treatment techniques built on neuroplasticity principles for patients with neurologic dysfunction. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course advances examination, evaluation and management of specific movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from nervous system pathology. Emphasis is on spinal cord injury, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and other acquired, genetic, and degenerative nervous system disorders common to physical therapist practice. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework through clinical cases is used to strengthen students critical reasoning for developing comprehensive, patient-centered care plans for patients across the continuum of clinical practice settings. Lab experiences continue integration of critical reasoning for selection, performance and adaptation of examination and interventions skills for treatment and management of patients with neurologic diseases/conditions. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses.DPTP8620Cardiopulmonary Practice  - 4 s.h.This course builds on the use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop evaluation, examination, and management skills for patients with common cardiovascular, metabolic, and pulmonary causes of movement system dysfunction. Lab activities include, but are not limited to, ECG analysis, exercise testing, heart and lung auscultation, lung function testing, and chest examinations. Case discussions are presented to enhance communication, safety, patient management, application of evidence for practice, and discharge planning skills across a variety of clinical settings. Students develop appropriate observation and clinical skills necessary for completing a comprehensive evaluation and formulating a comprehensive plan of care with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8640Integumentary I  - 2 s.h.This course provides a foundation for physical therapist evaluation and management of integumentary health and decision-making related wounds and vascular diseases that impacts patients/clients across the lifespan. Communication and collaboration with the interprofessional care team to manage patients with integumentary impairments, wounds, and limb amputations is a focus in this course. Combining understanding of lifestyle, psychosocial and social determinants (drivers) of health from prior courses is advanced through direct instruction and case application. Specific principles for management of patients with limb differences and prosthetic needs, including early post-operative management, prosthetic materials, design, fabrication, and technology, and ongoing physical therapy interventions to optimize functional performance is a focus of this course. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 coursesDPTP8660Business Management & Leadership  - 3 s.h.This course provides an overview of basic business principles, as they relate to the practice of physical therapy with a systems-based thinking approach. Students will gain knowledge on assorted topics related to leadership, healthcare business management and health informatics. There is a specific focus on understanding payer relationships, diagnostic coding, current procedural terminology, clinical productivity, and operating margin. The course will prepare students to be stewards of fiscal responsibility and leaders in the field of physical therapy. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8700Integrative Pain Sciences  - 2 s.h.This course provides an overview of managing people with neuromusculoskeletal chronic pain syndromes and the associated psychosocial factors using emerging and contemporary concepts of pain assessment, treatment, and outcomes. Use of case simulations builds on previous pain management knowledge and core competencies while advancing motivational interviewing and therapeutic alliance skills. This course emphasizes the core knowledge necessary for offering best care of patients and provides integrated interprofessional perspectives on comprehensive pain management designed to improve patient outcomes.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 coursesDPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice I  - 8 s.h.This integrated clinical education course develops student examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during an 8-week mentored clinical experience. The student initiates teamwork and communication with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals and begins to appreciate the role of each team member. This is an integrated experience that builds on the didactic and psychomotor courses within the curriculum. Students begin practice using evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses and demonstrated readiness for clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP8710Management of the Aging Adult  - 2 s.h.This course strengthens the students' understanding of normal and abnormal physiology of aging, and the sociologic and economic consequences on the individual and society. Use of clinical cases that focus on prioritization and management of co-morbidities (e.g., vascular, or visual compromise, falls, depression, etc.) common in the aging adult strengthens students' clinical reasoning. Advancing patient-centered care and use of motivational interviewing skills is reinforced through live and simulated cases. Lab activities develop patient management skills for care of the aging adult across practice settings, and with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.DPTP8720Pediatric Practice I  - 2 s.h.Using a framework of normal development from birth to young adulthood, this course presents fundamental concepts for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Current evidence is applied to examination, evaluation, documentation and management of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions of common pediatric conditions. Topics of family centered care, advocacy, and assistive technologies are explored using live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 coursesDPTP8721Pediatric Practice II  - 1 s.h.This course further develops the framework for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Topics include plan of care development and family centered care strategies to enhance functional outcomes and participation for clients with select acquired and developmental conditions. Advancing clinical reasoning and use of evidence is progressed through live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 coursesDPTP8730Management of Complex Patients  - 2 s.h.This course advances management strategy prioritization for medically complex patients and integrates culturally competent and mindful patient management concepts throughout. Clinical cases present patients across the lifespan with primary movement system impairments due to diseases, conditions, and comorbidities of the cardiovascular, neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, lymphatic, pulmonary, metabolic /endocrine, reproductive/urologic, and immune systems to strengthen clinical reasoning. Students will incorporate community health informatics and risk mitigation strategies in the design of individual and community-based interventions for effective screening and optimal disease management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.DPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & Technology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physical therapist’s role as an interdependent practitioner working within a collaborative medical model. By integrating the evidence for medical screening methods, clinical diagnosis, and imaging modalities with clinical cases, students will develop efficient and effective processes for collecting, evaluating, and communicating examination data while advancing differential diagnostic reasoning. Building on prior coursework, clinical scenarios will advance data driven decision-making, applications for wearable and emerging technology, and effective management of patients across all spectrums in the continuum of care. Students will apply wellness, screening, and patient/client education skillsets to improve the health of the GU and/or their local community. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic Interventions  - 2 s.h.This course expands on the students’ critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and management of patients with movement system dysfunctions. This course is a progression of techniques related to spinal stabilization, movement impairments, and soft tissue dysfunction. Interventions include a progression of exercise therapy, manual therapy techniques, dry needling, manipulation, mobilization, muscle energy, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and proprioceptive/vestibular treatments. Students are provided with expanded knowledge and skills from foundational content previously taught. Lab activities use case scenarios to challenge clinical reasoning for the development and progression of comprehensive treatment plans. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 coursesDPTP8760Integumentary II  - 3 s.h.This course introduces management strategy prioritization for patients with primary oncologic, integumentary, and lymphatic conditions with secondary co-morbidities across all body systems commonly seen in physical therapist practice. Advancing evidence supported clinical reasoning and building skills to enhance the therapeutic alliance for collaborative decision making with patients and the interprofessional care team is a focus of this course. Use of clinical cases reinforces integration of culturally competent, mindful, and evidence informed care for patients across the lifespan and spectrum of physical therapist practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.DPTP8900PT Seminar  - 1-3 s.h.This seminar course allows students to engage in curricular study that meets identified student learning needs. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop learning and assessment of learning necessary for ongoing development. This course may be taken more than once to guide specific student learning in the DPT program. Course credit hours will be determined by the program director. Course graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Permission of the DPT Program DirectorDPTP9412Professional Competencies III  - 1 s.h.The final course in this series advances student's leadership, and practice management roles across the spectrum of care, and investigates those as a clinical researcher, advocate, educator, and primary care provider. The student explores medical ethics, health care regulations, and practice risk management strategies and how they interact with provision of physical therapy services. Refining strategies to manage fraud and abuse, difficult conversations, situational safety, and challenging clinical scenarios will be a focus of this course. Students will refine a development plan focused on professional growth for the first year of practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, subsession 5-A coursesDPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice II  - 10 s.h.This course advances the student’s ability to perform examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during a 10-week mentored clinical education experience. The student further develops the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals. Emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, sub session 5-A courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice III  - 14 s.h.This course progresses students to entry-level patient management skills during a 14-week mentored clinical experience. The student refines the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and healthcare professionals while advancing critical reasoning and use of evidence for optimizing patient management. This course emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)DPTP9710PT Independent Study  - 1 s.h.This course allows students to explore contemporary topics in physical therapy practice, professional formation, and preparedness for entry to practice by integrating prior knowledge with evidence on selected topic. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop a learning contract of autonomous study and products of this study sufficient to meet course hour requirements. Students must have a signed learning contract before beginning coursework. Course graded as pass/ fail. May be taken in any semester of the second program year. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all prior DPT courseworkDPTP9711Capstone  - 2 s.h.This course integrates and applies cumulative knowledge gained from all previous didactic courses and clinical internship experiences. Throughout this course, students engage in reflective practice in three principal areas including integration of content learned throughout the curriculum, direct application relative to patients managed in the clinical experiences, and professional growth to prepare for practice. Students will compile this reflection into a format that demonstrates their professional formation and articulates how they will uphold the 8 core values for physical therapists as they move into practice. Students develop and implement a study plan to prepare for taking a simulated National Physical Therapy License Exam just prior to graduation. Use of lifelong learner skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses.
- DPTP8101Human Anatomy IDPTP8101Human Anatomy I  - 4 s.h.This course introduces foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the trunk and lower quarter. Explores the clinical application of genetics, embryology, histology, and basic joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for tissue differential identification. This course addresses the content of the anatomical regions, including the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower extremities. Emphasis is on neuromuscular and musculoskeletal anatomy. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program.
- DPTP8102Human Anatomy IIDPTP8102Human Anatomy II  - 3 s.h.This continues to develop foundational knowledge of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy of the cervicothoracic spine and upper quarter. Explores the clinical application of joint structure and function and the forces that affect human movement across the lifespan. Laboratory experiences include use of 3-dimensional anatomy software, living/surface anatomy, synthetic human anatomical models, and other resources to develop sound strategies for differential tissue identification. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8130Human PhysiologyDPTP8130Human Physiology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physiology and pathophysiology of the cellular, integumentary, neuromuscular, cardiovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and immune systems. Studies medical physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8140PharmacologyDPTP8140Pharmacology  - 2 s.h.This course introduces pharmacologic principles and studies medications used in the management of common patient conditions encountered during physical therapy care, and their influence on patient management across the lifespan. The impact of medications on patient presentations, timing of rehabilitation sessions, and physical therapy outcomes are emphasized. Content includes common medications for the cardiovascular, pulmonary, neurological, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, urogenital, rheumatologic, psychosocial, and integumentary systems. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8150Movement ScienceDPTP8150Movement Science  - 2 s.h.This course offers a framework for understanding normal and abnormal movement by introducing the fundamentals of movement science focused on the areas of kinesiology, neuroscience, physiology, motor control, and motor learning. Integrating theory with basic principles of motor behavior and motor development will be applied to human motor performance and gait across the lifespan. Emphasis is on the integration of theory, structured movement analyses of activities performed in daily life, and the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) model to inform clinical decision making in physical therapist practice. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience IDPTP8201Clinical Neuroscience I  - 1 s.h.This course explores the neuroscience of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, neurophysiological functions and developmental sequence of the motor and sensory systems that regulate movement. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience IIDPTP8302Clinical Neuroscience II  - 2 s.h.This course deepens neuroscience understanding of the movement system, with emphasis on the neuroanatomical structures, pathways and neurophysiological functions that regulate the senses, reflexes posture and the viscera. Lab activities emphasize elements of the neurologic examination and an introduction to common outcome measures and assessment tools. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8310Physical Therapy FundamentalsDPTP8310Physical Therapy Fundamentals  - 3 s.h.This course prepares the student for patient care activities including patient-centered communication, use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework and introduction to its use in various clinical settings. Students will begin to develop patient interview and documentation skills, perform examination tests and measures, and use standardized patient outcome measures. Use of the International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) model for critical thinking and data categorization is introduced. Psychomotor skills that are foundational to examination and evaluation are introduced, including vital signs, body mechanics awareness, patient positioning and draping, transfers, assistive device training, basic exercise instruction goniometry, range of motion, muscle testing, and anthropometric measures. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions IDPTP8321Therapeutic Interventions I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces and integrates biomechanical principles of joint structure and function, movement analysis, and tissue healing and response to stress. Application of these principles is used to develop basic intervention prescription for the management of patients with acute pain and mobility impairments across the lifespan, with a focus on therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and selected physical agents. Patient cases are presented to build a framework for identifying tissue specific intervention needs based on identified impairment(s) and activity/participation limitations. Integrates current evidence and clinical decision-making to emphasize appropriate selection, instruction, and progression of interventions. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Progra
- DPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions IIDPTP8322Therapeutic Interventions II  - 3 s.h.This course further develops the principles and application of selected physical-agents and therapeutic interventions for the management of patients with pain and tissue injury while addressing impairments related to mobility, strength, and motor control deficits across the lifespan. Integrates tissue healing principles, current evidence, and case presentation into the clinical decision-making framework to appropriately select, instruct, and progress interventions. Concepts for developing therapeutic alliance and empathy are introduced. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness ManagementDPTP8330Health Promotion & Fitness Management  - 2 s.h.This course introduces preventive health, wellness, and fitness concepts as they relate to injury prevention, nutritional influences, social determinants of health, fitness testing, and exercise prescription in a healthy population. Students develop injury prevention and exercise programs based on examination results and deliver these to the client using proper procedures and patient-centered communication. Through live or virtual cases, students will learn to modify programs to meet the needs of those with various health literacy and health center access. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice IDPTP8401Evidence-Based Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces the foundation of general research and evidence-based principles by exploring research methodologies and outcome measures used in health care. Introduces foundational concepts of scientific inquiry for clinicians by creating clinical questions, searching appropriate literature sources, and assessing the evidence quality. Development and use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice IIDPTP8402Evidence-Based Practice II  - 2 s.h.This course expands elements of applied research design and statistics that foster students to become intelligent consumers of scientific literature. Items related to measurement, research design, statistical analysis, critical inquiry, and strength of evidence are presented. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8411Professional Competencies IDPTP8411Professional Competencies I  - 1 s.h.The course defines professional conduct and teaches professional formation and application of lifelong learning skills necessary for developing towards a physical therapy practitioner. Throughout this course, students explore the ethics, core values, and roles and responsibilities of the physical therapist, and the importance of optimizing communication with respect to others' individual and cultural differences, and abilities. Creating an initial professional and lifelong learning skills development plan prepares the student for the professional physical therapy curriculum. Prerequisite: Admission to Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
- DPTP8412Professional Competencies IIDPTP8412Professional Competencies II  - 1 s.h.The second course in this series prepares students professionally and emotionally for physical therapy clinical practice through exploring roles as a lifelong learner, patient advocate, clinical educator, and a member of the interprofessional care team. Students investigate major health care payer models, billing and coding practice, patient care optimization, and health care regulations, and their impact on physical therapy services. This course blends topics through case applications focused on communication, cultural safety, professional behavior and abilities, ethics, legal issues, safety, and risk management perspectives across all practice settings. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice IDPTP8501Musculoskeletal Practice I  - 3 s.h.This course advances use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop strategies for systems differential identification, neuromuscular differential diagnosis and for interprofessional collaboration when needed. This course introduces examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing for select conditions of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and hip regions and develops critical reasoning through use of clinical cases. This course emphasizes application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions targeting patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice IIDPTP8502Musculoskeletal Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course continues to develop students' use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework in the examination, evaluation, and treatment sequence of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the lower quarter. Focus is placed on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. This course builds on culturally competent, patient centered care through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice IIIDPTP8503Musculoskeletal Practice III  - 3 s.h.The third course in this series continues use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and treatment sequencing of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for the head and cervicothoracic region. Concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient centered care and use of sound critical reasoning strategies is developed through clinical case presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IVDPTP8504Musculoskeletal Practice IV  - 3 s.h.This The final course in this series continues to integrate critical reasoning for the differential diagnosis, examination, evaluation, and management of the neuro-musculoskeletal system for musculoskeletal dysfunction of the upper extremities. This course concentrates on the application of psychomotor skills related to regional palpation, examination, and evidence-based interventions emphasizing patient education, manual physical therapy, and therapeutic exercise in a patient-centered approach across the lifespan. Ongoing integration of culturally competent, patient-centered care is advanced through clinical presentations and management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice IDPTP8601Neuromuscular Practice I  - 2 s.h.This course introduces examination and management of movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from central nervous system pathology, with emphasis on traumatic and acquired brain injury, concussion management, and vestibular conditions. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to build on the student’s critical reasoning strategies is integrated through use of clinical cases. Lab experiences develop patient-centered management skills and recovery-based treatment techniques built on neuroplasticity principles for patients with neurologic dysfunction. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice IIDPTP8602Neuromuscular Practice II  - 3 s.h.This course advances examination, evaluation and management of specific movement disorders and neurological conditions stemming from nervous system pathology. Emphasis is on spinal cord injury, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and other acquired, genetic, and degenerative nervous system disorders common to physical therapist practice. Application of the patient management clinical reasoning framework through clinical cases is used to strengthen students critical reasoning for developing comprehensive, patient-centered care plans for patients across the continuum of clinical practice settings. Lab experiences continue integration of critical reasoning for selection, performance and adaptation of examination and interventions skills for treatment and management of patients with neurologic diseases/conditions. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses.
- DPTP8620Cardiopulmonary PracticeDPTP8620Cardiopulmonary Practice  - 4 s.h.This course builds on the use of the patient management clinical reasoning framework to develop evaluation, examination, and management skills for patients with common cardiovascular, metabolic, and pulmonary causes of movement system dysfunction. Lab activities include, but are not limited to, ECG analysis, exercise testing, heart and lung auscultation, lung function testing, and chest examinations. Case discussions are presented to enhance communication, safety, patient management, application of evidence for practice, and discharge planning skills across a variety of clinical settings. Students develop appropriate observation and clinical skills necessary for completing a comprehensive evaluation and formulating a comprehensive plan of care with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8640Integumentary IDPTP8640Integumentary I  - 2 s.h.This course provides a foundation for physical therapist evaluation and management of integumentary health and decision-making related wounds and vascular diseases that impacts patients/clients across the lifespan. Communication and collaboration with the interprofessional care team to manage patients with integumentary impairments, wounds, and limb amputations is a focus in this course. Combining understanding of lifestyle, psychosocial and social determinants (drivers) of health from prior courses is advanced through direct instruction and case application. Specific principles for management of patients with limb differences and prosthetic needs, including early post-operative management, prosthetic materials, design, fabrication, and technology, and ongoing physical therapy interventions to optimize functional performance is a focus of this course. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 1 courses
- DPTP8660Business Management & LeadershipDPTP8660Business Management & Leadership  - 3 s.h.This course provides an overview of basic business principles, as they relate to the practice of physical therapy with a systems-based thinking approach. Students will gain knowledge on assorted topics related to leadership, healthcare business management and health informatics. There is a specific focus on understanding payer relationships, diagnostic coding, current procedural terminology, clinical productivity, and operating margin. The course will prepare students to be stewards of fiscal responsibility and leaders in the field of physical therapy. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.
- DPTP8700Integrative Pain SciencesDPTP8700Integrative Pain Sciences  - 2 s.h.This course provides an overview of managing people with neuromusculoskeletal chronic pain syndromes and the associated psychosocial factors using emerging and contemporary concepts of pain assessment, treatment, and outcomes. Use of case simulations builds on previous pain management knowledge and core competencies while advancing motivational interviewing and therapeutic alliance skills. This course emphasizes the core knowledge necessary for offering best care of patients and provides integrated interprofessional perspectives on comprehensive pain management designed to improve patient outcomes.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses
- DPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice IDPTP8701Physical Therapy Practice I  - 8 s.h.This integrated clinical education course develops student examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during an 8-week mentored clinical experience. The student initiates teamwork and communication with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals and begins to appreciate the role of each team member. This is an integrated experience that builds on the didactic and psychomotor courses within the curriculum. Students begin practice using evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses and demonstrated readiness for clinical education (as determined by faculty)
- DPTP8710Management of the Aging AdultDPTP8710Management of the Aging Adult  - 2 s.h.This course strengthens the students' understanding of normal and abnormal physiology of aging, and the sociologic and economic consequences on the individual and society. Use of clinical cases that focus on prioritization and management of co-morbidities (e.g., vascular, or visual compromise, falls, depression, etc.) common in the aging adult strengthens students' clinical reasoning. Advancing patient-centered care and use of motivational interviewing skills is reinforced through live and simulated cases. Lab activities develop patient management skills for care of the aging adult across practice settings, and with consideration of relevant educational, social, economic, and cultural patient factors. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.
- DPTP8720Pediatric Practice IDPTP8720Pediatric Practice I  - 2 s.h.Using a framework of normal development from birth to young adulthood, this course presents fundamental concepts for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Current evidence is applied to examination, evaluation, documentation and management of impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions of common pediatric conditions. Topics of family centered care, advocacy, and assistive technologies are explored using live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 2 courses
- DPTP8721Pediatric Practice IIDPTP8721Pediatric Practice II  - 1 s.h.This course further develops the framework for the physical therapy management of children and adolescents with musculoskeletal, neurological, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Topics include plan of care development and family centered care strategies to enhance functional outcomes and participation for clients with select acquired and developmental conditions. Advancing clinical reasoning and use of evidence is progressed through live and virtual clinical cases. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses
- DPTP8730Management of Complex PatientsDPTP8730Management of Complex Patients  - 2 s.h.This course advances management strategy prioritization for medically complex patients and integrates culturally competent and mindful patient management concepts throughout. Clinical cases present patients across the lifespan with primary movement system impairments due to diseases, conditions, and comorbidities of the cardiovascular, neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, lymphatic, pulmonary, metabolic /endocrine, reproductive/urologic, and immune systems to strengthen clinical reasoning. Students will incorporate community health informatics and risk mitigation strategies in the design of individual and community-based interventions for effective screening and optimal disease management. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses.
- DPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & TechnologyDPTP8740Primary Care PT: Tools & Technology  - 3 s.h.This course explores the physical therapist’s role as an interdependent practitioner working within a collaborative medical model. By integrating the evidence for medical screening methods, clinical diagnosis, and imaging modalities with clinical cases, students will develop efficient and effective processes for collecting, evaluating, and communicating examination data while advancing differential diagnostic reasoning. Building on prior coursework, clinical scenarios will advance data driven decision-making, applications for wearable and emerging technology, and effective management of patients across all spectrums in the continuum of care. Students will apply wellness, screening, and patient/client education skillsets to improve the health of the GU and/or their local community. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.
- DPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic InterventionsDPTP8750Advanced Therapeutic Interventions  - 2 s.h.This course expands on the students’ critical thinking, clinical reasoning, and management of patients with movement system dysfunctions. This course is a progression of techniques related to spinal stabilization, movement impairments, and soft tissue dysfunction. Interventions include a progression of exercise therapy, manual therapy techniques, dry needling, manipulation, mobilization, muscle energy, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and proprioceptive/vestibular treatments. Students are provided with expanded knowledge and skills from foundational content previously taught. Lab activities use case scenarios to challenge clinical reasoning for the development and progression of comprehensive treatment plans. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 4 courses
- DPTP8760Integumentary IIDPTP8760Integumentary II  - 3 s.h.This course introduces management strategy prioritization for patients with primary oncologic, integumentary, and lymphatic conditions with secondary co-morbidities across all body systems commonly seen in physical therapist practice. Advancing evidence supported clinical reasoning and building skills to enhance the therapeutic alliance for collaborative decision making with patients and the interprofessional care team is a focus of this course. Use of clinical cases reinforces integration of culturally competent, mindful, and evidence informed care for patients across the lifespan and spectrum of physical therapist practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 3 courses.
- DPTP8900PT SeminarDPTP8900PT Seminar  - 1-3 s.h.This seminar course allows students to engage in curricular study that meets identified student learning needs. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop learning and assessment of learning necessary for ongoing development. This course may be taken more than once to guide specific student learning in the DPT program. Course credit hours will be determined by the program director. Course graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Permission of the DPT Program Director
- DPTP9412Professional Competencies IIIDPTP9412Professional Competencies III  - 1 s.h.The final course in this series advances student's leadership, and practice management roles across the spectrum of care, and investigates those as a clinical researcher, advocate, educator, and primary care provider. The student explores medical ethics, health care regulations, and practice risk management strategies and how they interact with provision of physical therapy services. Refining strategies to manage fraud and abuse, difficult conversations, situational safety, and challenging clinical scenarios will be a focus of this course. Students will refine a development plan focused on professional growth for the first year of practice. Use of lifelong learning skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, subsession 5-A courses
- DPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice IIDPTP9702Physical Therapy Practice II  - 10 s.h.This course advances the student’s ability to perform examination, evaluation, and intervention skills during a 10-week mentored clinical education experience. The student further develops the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and other healthcare professionals. Emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5, sub session 5-A courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)
- DPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice IIIDPTP9703Physical Therapy Practice III  - 14 s.h.This course progresses students to entry-level patient management skills during a 14-week mentored clinical experience. The student refines the ability to communicate with patients/clients, family, and healthcare professionals while advancing critical reasoning and use of evidence for optimizing patient management. This course emphasizes evidence-based patient management and clinical reasoning skills as an adult learner and a healthcare professional as part of an interprofessional collaborative team. Course is graded as pass/ fail. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses and demonstrated readiness for continued clinical education (as determined by faculty)
- DPTP9710PT Independent StudyDPTP9710PT Independent Study  - 1 s.h.This course allows students to explore contemporary topics in physical therapy practice, professional formation, and preparedness for entry to practice by integrating prior knowledge with evidence on selected topic. Students will work with assigned faculty to develop a learning contract of autonomous study and products of this study sufficient to meet course hour requirements. Students must have a signed learning contract before beginning coursework. Course graded as pass/ fail. May be taken in any semester of the second program year. Prerequisite: Successful completion of all prior DPT coursework
- DPTP9711CapstoneDPTP9711Capstone  - 2 s.h.This course integrates and applies cumulative knowledge gained from all previous didactic courses and clinical internship experiences. Throughout this course, students engage in reflective practice in three principal areas including integration of content learned throughout the curriculum, direct application relative to patients managed in the clinical experiences, and professional growth to prepare for practice. Students will compile this reflection into a format that demonstrates their professional formation and articulates how they will uphold the 8 core values for physical therapists as they move into practice. Students develop and implement a study plan to prepare for taking a simulated National Physical Therapy License Exam just prior to graduation. Use of lifelong learner skills is expected. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Trimester 5 courses.
- Academic Calendar - Class of 2025 (Subject to change)TermEventDateSpring20241ATravel/Arrive for OrientationJanuary 3Orientation (onsite)January 4-5Travel/Depart for OrientationJanuary 6Subsession BeginsJanuary 8Holiday: MLK DayJanuary 15Travel/Arrive for lab immersionFebruary 20Onsite Lab ImmersionFebruary 21-29Travel/Depart for lab immersionMarch 1Subsession EndsMarch 2Spring20241BSubsession BeginsMarch 4Travel/Arrive for lab immersionApril 13Onsite Lab ImmersionApril 14 – 25Travel/Depart for lab immersionApril 26Subsession EndsApril 27Summer20242ASubsession BeginsMay 6Holiday: Memorial DayMay 27Travel/Arrive for lab immersionJune 11Onsite Lab ImmersionJune 12 – 26Travel/Depart for lab immersionJune 27Subsession EndsJune 27Summer20242BSubsession BeginsJune 28Holiday: July 4July 4Travel/Arrive for lab immersionAugust 3Onsite Lab ImmersionAugust 4 – 15Travel/Depart for lab immersionAugust 16Subsession EndsAugust 24Fall20243ASubsession BeginsAugust 26Holiday: Labor DaySeptember 2Travel/Arrive for lab immersionOctober 2Onsite Lab Immersion OctoberOctober 3 – 17Travel/Depart for lab immersionOctober 18Subsession EndsOctober 19Fall20243BSubsession BeginsOctober 21Holiday: ThanksgivingNovember 27 – 29Travel/Arrive for lab immersionDecember 1Onsite Lab ImmersionDecember 2 – 13Travel/Depart for lab immersionDecember 14Subsession EndsDecember 14Spring20254ASubsession BeginsJanuary 6Clinical Experience (PTP I)January 6 – February 28Subsession EndsMarch 1Spring20254B*Subsession BeginsMarch 3Subsession EndsApril 26*No lab immersionSummer20255ASubsession BeginsMay 5Holiday: Memorial DayMay 26Travel/Arrive for lab immersionMay 31Onsite Lab ImmersionJune 1 – 12Travel/Depart for lab immersionJune 13Subsession EndsJune 13Summer20255BSubsession BeginsJune 16Clinical Experience (PTP II)June 16 – August 22Subsession EndsAugust 23Fall20256ASubsession BeginsAugust 25Clinical Experience (PTP III)August 27 – December 3Fall20256BSubsession BeginsDecember 4Travel/Arrive for lab immersionDecember 9Onsite Lab ImmersionDecember 10 – 13Subsession EndsDecember 13Graduation – Independence, MODecember 13
- Academic Calendar - Class of 2026 (Subject to change)TermEventDateSpring2025 1ATravel/Arrive for OrientationDecember 14, 2024Orientation (onsite)December 15–17, 2024Travel/Depart for OrientationDecember 18, 2024Subsession BeginsJanuary 6Holiday: MLK DayJanuary 20Travel/Arrive for lab immersionFebruary 18Onsite Lab ImmersionFebruary 19–27Travel/Depart for lab immersionFebruary 28Subsession EndsMarch 1Spring2025 1BSubsession BeginsMarch 3Travel/Arrive for lab immersionApril 13Onsite Lab ImmersionApril 14–25Travel/Depart for lab immersionApril 26Subsession EndsApril 26Summer20252ASubsession BeginsMay 5Holiday: Memorial DayMay 26Travel/Arrive for lab immersionJune 10Onsite Lab ImmersionJune 11–25Travel/Depart for lab immersionJune 26Subsession EndsJune 28Summer2025 2BSubsession BeginsJune 30Holiday: July 4July 4Travel/Arrive for lab immersionAugust 3Onsite Lab ImmersionAugust 4–15Travel/Depart for lab immersionAugust 16Subsession EndsAugust 23Fall2025 3ASubsession BeginsAugust 25Holiday: Labor DaySeptember 1Travel/Arrive for lab immersionOctober 1Onsite Lab Immersion OctoberOctober 2–16Travel/Depart for lab immersionOctober 17Subsession EndsOctober 18Fall 2025 3BSubsession BeginsOctober 20Holiday: ThanksgivingNovember 26–28Travel/Arrive for lab immersionNovember30Onsite Lab ImmersionDecember 1–12Travel/Depart for lab immersionDecember 13Subsession EndsDecember 13Spring2026 4ASubsession BeginsJanuary 5Clinical Experience (PTP I)January 5–February 27Subsession EndsFebruary28Spring2026 4B*Subsession BeginsMarch 2Subsession EndsApril 25*No lab immersionSummer2026 5ASubsession BeginsMay 4Holiday: Memorial DayMay 25Travel/Arrive for lab immersionMay 30Onsite Lab ImmersionMay 31–June11Travel/Depart for lab immersionJune 12Subsession EndsJune 13Summer2026 5BSubsession BeginsJune 15Clinical Experience (PTP II)June 15–August 21Subsession EndsAugust 22Fall2026 6ASubsession BeginsAugust 24Clinical Experience (PTP III)August 26–December 2Fall2026 6BSubsession BeginsDecember 3Travel/Arrive for lab immersionDecember 8Onsite Lab ImmersionDecember 9–12Subsession EndsDecember 12Graduation – Independence, MODecember 12
- The program has determined that its curriculum meets the state educational requirements for licensure or certification in all states, the District of Colombia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands secondary to its accreditation by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education, based on the following:CAPTE accreditation of a physical therapist or physical therapist assistant program satisfies state educational requirements in all states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Thus, students graduating from CAPTE-accredited physical therapist and physical therapist assistant education programs are eligible to take the National Physical Therapy Examination and apply for licensure in all states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. For more information regarding state qualifications and licensure requirements, refer to the Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy atfsbpt.org.
- CAPTE accreditation of a physical therapist or physical therapist assistant program satisfies state educational requirements in all states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Thus, students graduating from CAPTE-accredited physical therapist and physical therapist assistant education programs are eligible to take the National Physical Therapy Examination and apply for licensure in all states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. For more information regarding state qualifications and licensure requirements, refer to the Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy atfsbpt.org.
- Below is the U.S. Department of Education (USDE) rule change which allows students enrolled in institutions with Candidate for Accreditation or “pre-accreditation” status to sit for the licensure exam immediately upon graduation. Further, because of this rule change, initial accreditation status is no longer required to sit for the exam. Additionally, cohort number two (2026 graduating class) may complete the program and take the exam if initial accreditation is not granted due to the reconsideration and appeal processes. A third cohort may not be accepted if initial accreditation is not granted.
- According to theUSDE Federal Register 602.23(f)(2), effective July 01, 2020, “All credits and degrees earned and issued by an institution or program holding pre-accreditation from a nationally recognized agency are considered by the Secretary to be from an accredited institution or program.”
- From CAPTE in April, 2020, the rules were changed and state: “Per USDE regulations, all credits and degrees earned and issued by a program holding candidacy are considered to be from an accredited program.”
- Graceland University is a member of the National Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement (SARA). SARA is an agreement among member states, districts, and territories establishing national standards for the interstate offering of postsecondary distance education.
- Privacy Overview
- Strictly Necessary Cookies
- 3rd Party Cookies
